[00:01] YUPENG ZHANG: Hello, everyone. Welcome back to our MOOC on zero-knowledge proofs. I'm Yupeng Zhang, and today I'm going to talk about polynomial commitment schemes based on error-correcting codes. Recall that a common paradigm to construct efficient SNARKs for general circuits is to combine a polynomial commitment scheme with an appropriate polynomial interactive proof, such as the PLONK IOP and the interactive proofs, as we've seen in previous lectures. Last time I started this section on polynomial commitments and talked about the classical protocol of the KCG polynomial commitment. The protocol utilizes the bilinear pairing and has this trusted setup step, to compute the global parameters with this structure and the trapdoor in it. And the key idea of the scheme relies on this polynomial equation to compute the quotient polynomial q of x. And the scheme has a very small group size and a very fast verifier time in practice. The proof only consists of a single element in the group, and the verifier only needs to compute a single parent equation. In addition, I also talked about other polynomial schemes without trusted setup, that are based on discrete log problem. Those include bulletproofs, hyrax, dory, and dark. In this lecture, we are going to see a new class of polynomial schemes based on error-correcting codes. And to give you some motivations, here I'm showing you the pros and cons of these schemes on this slide. So on the positive side, we are not aware of any efficient algorithms on quantum computers to break the assumptions of these schemes. So the schemes are plausibly post-quantum, unlike those that are based on discrete log problem. In addition, the prover time of these schemes [01:55] tend to be fast, because they do not require any group exponentiations. The prover only computes hash functions, Merkle trees, and some field additions, multiplications, and FFT. Finally, the size of the global parameters is very small, and there is no trusted set up. All we need to do is to sample a hash from a family of hash functions and the size is constant. But of course, these nice properties come at a cost. The first drawback is that the schemes usually have a very large proof size. And as you will see later, we are talking about several megabytes to tens of megabytes in practice. And another drawback is that because of the lack of the algebraic structure these proofs do not have this homomorphic property, and they are hard to aggregate-- in a similar way as we've seen last time in the variants of KZG polynomial commitments to support multiple evaluations. So to understand the schemes based on our error-occuring codes, here's the plan of this lecture. There will be three segments. In the first segment, I'm going to talk about some background on error-occuring codes. And with that background, in the second segment, I'm going to present the polynomial commitment schemes using any error-occuring codes. And in the last segment, I'm going to talk about this interesting line of work, to build linear-time encodable code based on expander graphs. And the polynomial commitment schemes and zere-knowledge proof schemes using this type of code to have a linear time prover in terms of the number of field additions and field multiplications. So let's start with the background. The error-occuring code is actually a well-studied topic in the area of information theory [03:49] and coding theory. It can be used to correct errors in the transmission over the network, and that is why it's called error-occuring code. An error-occuring code encodes a message of size k to a codeword of size n, where n is strictly larger than k. An important property of the error-occuring code is this concept of a minimum distance. So the distance between two codewords is the number of different locations between the two codewords, and this is called Hamming distance. And if you take the minimum of the distance between any two codewords and call it delta, that is the minimum distance of this error-occuring code. And this n, k, and delta are three important parameters of the code, and we really call it n. k, delta code. I know that there's-- another important parameter is the alphabet of the code, whether it's defined over a binary or a finite field, but I'm omitting this parameter in this notation. So to give you an example, the simplest example you're using is this repetition code. And here I'm using an example with a message of size 2 over the binary values, and the code was size 6. So essentially, we are repeating each symbol three times to encode the message. So that's why we have the encoding of 00 gives you all zeros, and encoding of 01 is 000111. And similarly, you have the encoding of 10 and the encoding of 11. And that's all possible messages of length 2 over the binary field. So then it's not hard to see that the minimum distance of this code is actually 3. Because if you take any two codewords from these four possible codewords, we have at least three locations between any two codewords that are different. And because this nice property, we can actually correct one error during the transmission. [05:52] Suppose that because the noise level it can only introduce at most one error during a transmission, and the codeword we receive is 010111. Then, because of this distant property of the repetition code, there is only one message whose codeword is one error away from this codeword-- that is, 01. And the codeword is 000111. And that is why we are sure that the original message must be 01, even with such an error during the transmission. So that is the original application of the error-correcting code. And the process to derive this original message from a received codeword is called decoding algorithm. And an interesting thing to note here is that in our polynomial commitment scheme, we are not going to use this decoding algorithm at all. So because of that, we can actually use error-correcting codes without efficient decoding. So next, I'm just going to define some additional terms. So we have this rate of an error-correcting code as k over n So essentially, it's representing the ratio of a meaningful message when we have a codeword of size k-- size n, sorry. So this is basically measuring out of n symbols, we only have k symbols representing the message. And this is a number between 0 and 1, and apparently we want it to be as close to 1 as possible. And we also have this term called relative distance, is basically the minimum distance delta divided by n. So this is the ratio of the codeword that is different between any two codewords. And again, this is a number between 0 and 1. And for the purpose of error correction, we also want it to be as big as possible. And using the same example of a repetition code, if we have a rate of 1 or a, meaning that we are going to repeat each symbol a times, then from the previous example, we can see that the distance of this code is a. And therefore the relative distance is the delta over n, where n equals to k times a. [08:14] So the distance is 1 over k. And turns out this is actually not very good, because it decays as the message size k increases. So it's not an asymptotically good code. And as we said, we want both the rate and the relative distance to be as big as possible. But unfortunately, there is usually a trade off between the rate and the distance of the code. Intuitively speaking, increasing the rate will actually decrease the relative distance of the code. And we have well-studied bounds on the relationship between the rate and the relative distance of a code under different settings. So the last concept we introduce is this linear code. And the linear code is actually the most common type of code we are using in practice. So for linear code, we have an additional requirement that any linear combination of codewords is also a codeword. And because of this property, it's equivalent to say that the encoding algorithm can always be represented as a vector matrix multiplication between message m and a generator matrix of size k times n. And because of all these cool techniques in linear algebra, the linear code can be analyzed to have a nice properties, and that's why it is the most common type of code we use in practice. And now the implication of the linear code is that the minimum distance is the same as the number of the least number of non-zeros for any non-zero codewords. And we call this as the weight of the codeword. And this is actually not hard to see because the distance is defined as the Hamming distance between any two codewords. And because the code is linear, the subtraction of those two code words is also a codeword. So that is saying that the number of different locations directly implies another codeword with that many non-zero elements. So therefore the minimum distance [10:21] between any two codewords is just equivalent to the minimum weight of a non-zero codeword for a linear code. That's something to keep in mind. So finally, I'm going to show you this classic construction of the linear code called Reed-Solomon code. And this is actually a very important construction in the literature and has many applications to build cryptographic primitives, such as the zero-knowledge proof schemes of Ligero and STARK and also for secret sharing and other applications in cryptography. So here I'm defining Reed-Solomon code over a finite-field module of prime number p. And the encode algorithm takes a size k message and encode it as a size n codeword. So the way to do it is we're going to view the message as a unique degree k minus 1 univariate polynomial. You can think of it as a polynomial interpolation on a fixed set of public coins of size k. And we are going to treat each symbol of the message as the valuation at a predefined point, and then we're going to interpolate it and get a unique degree, k minus 1.9. Then the codeword is simply the valuation of this polynomial at n points. Again, these are predefined and public points. For example, we can use the root of unity. And we're going to evaluate at omega, omega to the 2, all the way to omega to the n, where omega to the n equals 1 module p. And this is actually a linear code, because the encoding algorithm can be represented as a vector matrix multiplication between the message and the generator matrix, which can be derived from the Fourier matrix. And there is some code has a very nice distance. The distance is actually n minus k plus 1. [12:17] And this is very good. And that is because, as we said in the previous slides, for linear code the minimum distance is simply the minimum number of non-zero elements of a non-zero codeword. Then as each code word is actually the evaluation of a degree k minus 1 univariate polynomial, how many locations can be 0? Well at most, k minus 1. That is because a degree k minus 1 polynomial has at most, k minus 1 roots. So therefore at least n minus k plus 1 locations are non-zero for a non-zero message. So that is why the distance is this one. And to give you a concrete number, let's say that n equals to 2k. If we're expanding the message by 2 and get a codeword n equals to 2k, then the rate is a constant 1/2. That's actually pretty good in practice. Then by this derivation, the relative distance is also 1/2, is a constant. So the distance is also very good in practice. So it turns out this is actually the best you can achieve, and so the Reed-Solomon code is asymptotically good. And finally, the encoding time of Reed-Solomon code is order of n times log n using the fast Fourier transform algorithm-- FFT to evaluate this polynomial at these end points defined by the roots of unity. So that's everything I want to talk about for error-occuring codes. With this background, in the second segment of the lecture, I'm going to show you how to build polynomial commitments using linear codes. So recall that this is a setting of a polynomial commitment. We have four algorithms-- the key generation, commit, eval, and verify. And the scheme I'm going to show you here is derived from the papers of Ligero, Bootle et al in 2017, "Brakedown" and "Orion." And the scheme has a square-root-size proof [14:16] and a square-root-verification cost. So the key idea of this polynomial scheme is to identify the matrix structure in the polynomial evaluation. So here I'm showing you that a matrix consisting of the coefficients of the polynomial, from f11 all the way to f square root d. And I'm assuming that the number of coefficients of a polynomial is exact power of an integer. But of course, you can pad it if it is not. And the reason why we are arranging the coefficients of a polynomial in this form is that, we can actually write the equation of a polynomial evaluation as this equation. So we're going to have two indices, i and j, ranging from 1 all the way to square root d. And then compute this product between the coefficients and the corresponding monomial-- evaluate that point u in this way. And the nice property of this way of computing is that the polynomial evaluation f of u can actually be decomposed into two steps. So in the first step, we are going to multiply a vector defined by this version point u of size square root d with the matrix of the coefficients of the polynomial. And the result of this vector-matrix notation will give you a vector of size square root d. Then in the second step, we are going to multiply that vector with another vector derived from the evaluation point u and take the inner product. The result will be a single value that equals to the evaluation f of u. And if you do the derivation following the rules of vector matrix multiplications, you can see that this computation is exactly the same as the equation at the bottom. So I'm saying here that evaluation can be viewed as this two steps of vector-matrix on occasion. With this observation, we can actually [16:22] reduce the polynomial commitment scheme to an argument for vector-matrix product. So if you're good with a scheme, with a square root the proof size, then we can actually just prove the computation of the first step. So in the first step, we are going to multiply this vector of square root d size defined by the evaluation point u, with this matrix defined by the coefficients of the polynomial. And the result of that is a vector of a square root d size. So then the prover can just send this result of the vector directly to the verifier. And the verifier verifies that the first step is actually computed correctly using this proof system. And then you evaluate the second step locally, by taking the inner product of this vector with the second vector defined by the evaluation point u. And in this way, the proof size is only this vector of size square root d, and the verifier time is again square root d, by computing that inner product. So this is saying that if we can have an argument scheme for this first step of vector-matrix product-- with a reasonable proof size and worth our time, of course-- then we are going to have a polynomial commitment scheme with a square root d proof size and square root d verification time. So in this way, we reduce the problem to this simpler problem of vector-matrix product. So then the focus of the remaining part will be, how can we design a scheme to test the computation of this vector-matrix product without sending this matrix directly to the verifier side? So the idea is to use the linear error-occuring code to encode this matrix defined by the coefficients of the polynomial. So here we are going to encode each row of this matrix using a linear code. So then the dimension of this original matrix is square d by square root d. [18:34] And here the size of the message of this linear code, k equals to square root d. After encoding, we end up with an encoded matrix, and the dimension is square d by n, where n is the size of the codeword. And for your information, we are going to eventually use a linear code with a constant rate. So then n is asymptotically the same as k and which is also the same-- asymptotically the same as the square root d. So after encoding, we are not increasing the size of this encoding matrix syntactically. So with this encoding matrix, we are going to commit to this polynomial defined by this encoded matrix. And the commitment is using the Merkle hash tree. So recall that in previous lectures, we explained this very important primitive in cryptography called Merkle hash tree. And the construction is to compute the hash of two consecutive leaves and then do it recursively in a tree structure to get the root of this tree. And this root is served as a commitment of this vector. And later the prover can actually open this commitment and prove to the verifier that the leaf at a certain location equals to a particular value. And the proof is generated by traversing this tree and returning all the siblings along the path from the leaf to the root. And the verifier can actually reconstruct the root with only the information from the siblings, and the proof size is only logarithm in the size of the vector. So this is the Merkle tree. And the way to commit to this polynomial is, first, we are going to encode this polynomial row-wise using the linear code. After that we are going to use the Merkle tree to commit to this encoded matrix column-wise. [20:26] We are going to view each column as one leaf of the Merkle tree and then build this Merkle tree on top of this matrix and then send this root hash to the verifier as the commitment of the polynomial. And using this commitment, you can imagine later that we can actually open each column individually. The prover can actually send a column chosen by the verifier-- and then together with the Merkle tree proof. And the verifier can verify that the column is not altered-- is actually indeed as committed in the first place by the proof. So this is the commitment step of the polynomial commitment I'm describing. And because of this commitment step, then actually the key generation of this polynomial commitment scheme is very straightforward. All we need to do is to sample a hash function that will be used for the Merkle tree, and that's it. So there's no trust to set up, and the size of the global parameter is only constant. Then the most complicated protocol of this polynomial commitment scheme is this evaluation together with the verification. And I'm going to spend plenty of time explaining these steps in details. So the raw algorithm can be roughly divided into two steps. And the first step is called the proximity test, or proximity checking. And the main goal of this step is to test if the committed matrix indeed consists of these squared d codewords encoded row-wise. And the reason for this check is that-- recall in the commitment phase, an honest prover should commit to this matrix as encoded from the original matrix defined by the coefficients of the polynomial. But if the prover is malicious, he may not follow the algorithms we were describing. In particular, it is actually not hard for the verifier to check the size of this matrix-- [22:33] for example, by returning one path of the Merkle tree. But even if the matrix-- the size of the matrix or the dimension of the matrix is as specified, each row may not be a valid codeword of the linear code. A malicious prover could generate any arbitrary vector of length n and then put square root d of these vectors and commit it using Merkle tree and send it to the verifier. They're not even codewords of this code. And again, using the Reed-Solomon code as an example, if the prover is honest, then each row should be a Reed-Solomon code encoding-- in particular a polynomial evaluated at endpoints. But a malicious prover may just commit to any vectors of length, and they may not be on the same polynomial of degree k minus 1. So that is the purpose of this first proximity test, trying to ensure that the committed matrix is indeed encoded as specified by the commitment algorithm. And the way to do it is as follows. So first the verifier is going to send a random vector of size square root d. And I'm using r1 and r2 all the way to rd, to denote it here. And the verifier is asking the prover to return the result of this vector times the encoded matrix. So then the result of this computation is a vector of size n-- the same as the size of one row, if the prover is honest. After that the verifier is going to pick several random columns and ask the prover to open these columns. And recall that in the commitment phase, the prover already commits to the columns using a Merkle tree. So in this step, the prover also sends the corresponding Merkle tree proofs, in particular paths from the leaves to the root-- so that by checking these Merkle tree proofs, the verifier can make sure that these random selected columns are indeed consistent with those committed in the first place. [24:42] The prover cannot change the values of these columns at all. Then, finally, the verifier is going to perform the following three checks. The first check is that this vector returned by proving the first round is indeed a codeword of the linear code. And this is true if the prover is honest because of the property of a linear code. Any linear combination of codewords still gives you a codeword. So this is actually a linear combination of r1 times the first row plus r2 times the second row and so forth. And this still should give you a codeword, if the prover is honest. Second, the verifier checks that the columns are indeed as committed using the Merkle tree. And this is, as I explained before, can be done by checking the Merkle path proof to ensure that the prover cannot change any value of these committed columns. Finally, the verifier is going to compute the inner product between this random vector and each column. And by the rule of a vector-matrix modification, you can see that if the answer is honestly computed, then the inner product between this vector r and each column should equal to the corresponding element of this vector returned by the prover. And verifier is checking this relationship for each column that is chosen randomly by the verifier itself. And if all of these three checks pass, then with overwhelming probability the verifier can actually conclude that the committed matrix is indeed as encoded in the commitment algorithm we described before. So that is the description of this proximity test. So why is this protocol secure? So here I'm going to sketch the intuition of the soundness proof. And it heavily relies on the property of the linear code. [26:49] So as usual, we are going to start with a contradiction. Suppose that the prover cheats. So this committed matrix is actually not an encoded matrix as specified. The prover can actually pick any values in the vectors and then put them together and commit it using a Merkle tree. Then, we are going to condition on whether this vector in the first round is correctly computed or not. So if this vector is correctly computed based on this fake matrix chosen by the prover, then by the property of a linear code it can-- the vector-matrix product as correctly computed by the prover cannot be a codeword. So then the check 1 will fail. So this is saying that this is a simple strategy. So the prover is cheating, is committing to a wrong matrix, then you just can't follow the wrong matrix and compute the inner product between this random value vector and the matrix. And the result won't be a codeword because of the linear property of the code and won't pass check 1-- which means that the adversary is left with only the second option, which is the prover has to return a wrong vector, that is not the result of the inner product between this vector and this matrix committed by the prover. And if that is the case, then we have this nice property of the distance of the codeword. Because this wrong answer is still has to be a codeword to pass check one, then by the minimum distance property of a linear code, there should be many locations that are different from the correct answer. For example, if you're using a Reed-Solomon code again with a relative distance 1/2, then that means that half of the locations are actually wrong-- actually different from the correct answer of this vector-matrix product. Because of that, by the second check, the columns are the same as committed. [29:08] You cannot lie about these columns that are opened by the verifier. Then it means that the probability of passing the third check is extremely small. That is because if half of the locations are actually different from the correct answer, what is the probability of opening a random column and still passing the verification of this inner product? The inner product between this random vector and this column is actually correctly computed, given the fact that half of the locations are actually wrong. Well, the probability is 1/2, is a constant. So then by opening multiple columns, saying that 100 columns, the probability of passing this check 3 decays exponentially. So in that way, we can actually achieve a negligible soundness error. And so the whole soundness can actually be proven to have a negligible cheating probability. So that is the intuition behind this proximity test. So this proximity test algorithm was actually introduced independently by these two papers. The first one is Ligero, and the second one is by Bootle et al, in 2017. And in Ligero, they call this one as a interleaved test, and the protocol uses the Reed-Solomon code-- where the encoding time, of course, is linear, by order of n log n. And independently in Bootle et al in 2017, they also propose a similar proximity test algorithm, and they call it the ideal multilinear commitment model. And based on this model, they actually designed a scheme for a general purpose, not for circuit computation. And they were using a linear-timing code instead of Reed-Solomon code, which I'm going to introduce this in the third segment of the lecture. And this actually gives the first SNARK with a strict linear-prover time, [31:11] in terms of field additions and field modifications. And by the way, the schemes proposing these two papers were actually for general purpose SNARKs. And here I'm actually presenting this technique and use it to construct the polynomial commitments as a specialized protocol, which was actually proposed in the follow-up papers-- such as "Brakedown" and the "Orion" that I'm going to highlight later. So that is just the intuition of the soundness proof. And turns out in the formal proof things are actually much more complicated. And here I'm just showing you the kind of key differences, and I refer you to read the details in the paper of Ligero. So it turns out in the formal proof-- is actually we can't prove that the prover cannot cheat at all. Like, we can't catch the cheating prover if he merely changes one value of this encoded matrix. What we can prove is that if the committed matrix C is very far away from any codeword that is encoded as specified by commitment, we can actually catch it with an overwhelming probability. In particular, we define another parameter called e, that is related to the distance of this linear code. So e is less than delta over 4, for any number e. Then if the committed matrix e-far from any codeword-- meaning that if we take the minimum distance of any row with any codeword in this linear code, and if that distance is actually far away-- meaning that at least e locations that are different-- then we can actually catch the cheating prover with an overwhelming probability. Why is that? Well, in the formal proof, we can show that if this matrix C is e-far from a real codeword, then the vector matrix product between a random vector r and this committed matrix C-- the result-- we call it w-- that is exactly the vector returned by the prover, as I specified in the protocol-- the probability of that vector is e-close to any codeword is less than or equal to E plus 1 [33:44] over the size of this finite field. So this is extremely small. This is negligible. Which means that if the committed matrix C is e-far from any codeword as a matrix, then this vector is also far from any codeword with high probability. So that is the difference of the claim from the intuition to the formal proof. So then if we rule out this possibility, then the remaining part is exactly the same as the intuition. Conditioning on this vector w is actually e-close to any-- sorry, e-far from any codeword-- then the probability of passing check 3 for t random columns decays exponentially with t. So in particular because e over n fraction of the values are different from the real result, then the probability of passing all checks for all t random columns is 1 minus e over n to the power of t. And that decays exponentially with t. And this is exactly the reason why we need a linear code with a constant relative distance. So this e is related to the distance of the code. So you can roughly think of this as related to the relative distance. And if you have a constant relative distance, this number is a constant, and then we can make it negligible by repeating the check for t columns-- say, 100 columns, or 500 columns. Otherwise, if the distance of the code is not good, then we cannot make this probability negligible. So that is why we need a linear code with constant relative distance, such as Reed-Solomon code. And by the way, in a recent version of this Ligero, the authors further show that we can actually choose any e that is less than delta over 3 as a parameter in this proof. [35:36] So that improves the proof size by some factor. So that is the reason why this proximity testing is working. We can actually show that the committed matrix is actually close to a codeword that is encoded using the commitment algorithm. Another interesting thing I want to mention here is that we can actually perform one optimization in this proximity test. So the optimization is that instead of sending the codeword, which is the result of this vectoc-matrix product, the prover can actually send a message behind this codeword to the verifier. And then the verifier can actually use this message-- it can actually encode this message to recover this codeword that was supposed to be sent by the prover-- and then perform the remaining checks. And why this is a nice optimization, first, this actually reduces the size of the proof. Because instead of sending a vector of size n, we now only need to send a message of size only n-- only k-- that is equal to square root d. Another optimization is that the verifier now doesn't have to perform the first check, where this vector is a codeword. This check's performed implicitly, because it is literally encoded from a message sent by the prover. So it has to be a codeword. And another interesting observation is that by the property of a linear code, this message of size square root D is exactly same as the result of the vector-matrix product between this random vector with the original matrix, that was defined by the coefficients of the polynomial instead of the encoded matrix. And it is actually not hard to check due to the property of the linear code. So this is a nice optimization to keep [37:40] in mind for the remaining of the protocol. So now with the first step of this proximity check, with overwhelming probability the verifier knows that this committed matrix must be close to an encoded matrix. Then the second step of this polynomial commitment is called the consistency test, or consistency check. The purpose of this step is to really test that the vector-matrix product between this vector defined by the vanishing point and this [INAUDIBLE] matrix equals to the claimed result-- a vector of size square root d. And turns out the algorithm, the protocol of this step, is almost the same as everything we did for the proximity test. So in order to do that, first, the prover is going to send the message, m, to the verifier, where the message should be equal to the vector-matrix product between this vector defined by the vanishing point and the original matrix defined by the coefficients of the polynomial of square root d-- by square root d before the encoding. And the result should be a vector of size square root d. And that is the message of a linear code. Then the verifier is going to encode this message to get a codeword of length n here. And as I explained in the previous slide using this optimization, this vector of size n should be the result of this vector defined by the vanishing point u times this encoded matrix of size square d by n here. And this is exactly the same as the proximity test with optimization I introduced. After that the verifier is going to pick several random columns and ask the prover to return these columns back. And recall that in the commitment phase, the prover commits to these columns using Merkle tree. So in this step, the prover further proves that these columns are actually-- has the corresponding Merkle tree path, so that the prover cannot change any value of these committed columns. And finally, the verifier is going [40:04] to perform exactly the same three checks as the proximity test. So first this vector is actually a codeword. Second, the columns are as committed in the Merkle tree. And third, the inner product between this vector defined by the vanishing point u. And each column is consistent with the corresponding location of this code word. And the reason why I'm actually removing this first two checks is that we don't need to do them anymore. So the first check is embedded in this encoding because of the optimization I mentioned. The prover only needs to send the message to the verifier. And the fact that the verifier encodes it to the codeword already tells the fact that this vector is a code word. The second one, we also don't need to do it because the columns we are opening here are exactly the same as ones in the proximity test. The verifier doesn't have to pick new randomly chosen columns. We are going to use exactly those columns opened in the proximity test, and we don't need to verify the Merkle tree paths anymore. So the only difference-- the only additional step to perform is the third one-- is again an inner product, but this time it's the inner product between this vector u here defined by the vanishing point instead of a random vector chosen in the proximity test. And we are going to do the inner product between this one, each column, and see that it is consistent with this codeword computed from the encoding of the message. And again, if this test is true, then we can conclude that this message m is the product between this vector defined by u and the original matrix defined by the coefficients of the polynomial before encoding. So that completes the description of the second step of a consistency check. So to sketch the soundness of this step, first, by the proximity test, we already [42:07] know that this committed matrix C is very close to a codeword. Then in order to prove knowledge soundness, the key idea is that, although we actually don't know whether this matrix is indeed exactly the same as an encoded matrix, because it is close to a codeword, then it is actually enough to actually build an efficient extractor to extract the coefficient matrix defining a polynomial. And this extraction is using the Merkle-tree commitment and also the efficient-decoding algorithm to decode this committment matrix. Because it is close to a codeword, then there is a unique coefficient matrix, F, so that we can actually track F such that the vector u times F equals to this message m returned by the prover. And that completes the first step of this vector-matrix product argument. And this is with an overwhelming probability. So that is the intuition of the soundness of this second step. And if you're interested in the formal proof, please feel free to refer to the papers for more details. And I'm not going to talk about the formal proof in this lecture. So to put everything together, this is the algorithm of this entire polynomial commitment. So in the key generation, we're just going to sample a hash function from a family of hashes. And to commit to a matrix, we are going to encode the coefficient matrix of F row-wise with a linear code, and then we are going to compute the Merkle-tree commitment on the columns of this encoded matrix. And then the eval and the verifier algorithm are actually a kind of interactive process. So there are two steps-- a proximity test and the consistency test. In the proximity test, we are going to compute the random linear combination of all the rows using the random challenge by the verifier. [44:16] And the verifier is going to check its consistency with t random columns. And this guarantees that the committed matrix is actually close to an encoded matrix. Then the second step, we are going to perform this consistency check, and we are going to use exactly those columns opened in the first step-- and checks that the inner product between the vector u defined by the vanishing point u with these columns is consistent with the answer that encoded from the message m. So in this way, we can make sure that u times the coefficient matrix F equals to m. And to complete the polynomial evaluation, we can perform the second step locally, on the verifier side. So the verifier simply computes the inner product between the message m and the second half of the vector, defined by this vanishing point. And I'm just going to call it u prime for simplicity. And if you still recall the derivation we showed in the very beginning, there's two steps of the vector-matrix product, and the inner product gives you the evaluation f of u, If the prover is honest. So that completes the entire description of this polynomial commitment. And this also shows you the necessity of this proximity test and the consistency check. So one question I usually get when seeing this protocol is, it looks like the proximity test and consistency test are almost the same. We are using the same open columns, and we are checking the inner products between these columns and the corresponding vector. So can we just perform only the consistency test without the proximity test? Well, the answer is no. And intuitively speaking, the reason is because this u is not randomly generated. [46:10] It's actually derived from the evaluation point u in a very well-structured way. And if this evaluation point is not randomly chosen from a large domain randomly in a finite field, then the consistence test only, the prover can actually cheat if he knows some information at that time about the evaluation point you're going to choose. And that is why this proximity test is necessary. So no matter what will be the evaluation point, we are going to run this proximity test using random challenges from the verifier. And this guarantees that the committed matrix is actually close to an encoded matrix. And then we can perform the consistency test and extract this witness such that the vector-matrix product is equal to n, with an overwhelming probability. So then next, let's see the properties of this polynomial-commitment scheme based on the linear code. So the key generation is very efficient. It does not require any trusted setup and merely samples the hash function, so the size of the global parameter is constant. In the commitment there are two steps. So first, we are going to encode this matrix row-wise, and the complexity is dominated by the encoding algorithm of the linear code. So if you're using the resolving code, for example, then the encoding complexity is order of d times log d. We're talking about field additions and modifications. Alternatively, we can use any linear code with a good relative distance-- in particular, constant relative distance. So then if you're using linear time encoded code with good distance, you can achieve a linear encoding time in this step. Next, we are going to commit this encoded matrix using a Merkle tree. And this one is actually not the dominant cost. [48:10] We are going to compute order of d hashes, and the commitment size is only constant-- the root of the Merkle tree. The evaluation will take order of d field additions and modifications again and can be made non-interactive using the Fiat Shamir transformation. So then, finally, the kind of-- as I mentioned, the drawback of this scheme is the proof size is relatively large. So in the scheme I'm presenting here, the proof size is order of square root d. And that is because we are opening, essentially, one row and the multiple columns of this encoded matrix. And the optimal solution is that the matrix dimension as square root d times square root d. So the proof size is order of square root d. And similarly, the verifier time is order of square root d. So to show you some concrete numbers-- so this is the performance of the polynomial-commitment scheme, that was actually described in the "Brakedown" paper. So for a polynomial of degree d equals to 2 to the 25-- that is about 32 million-- using a linear time encodable code, then I'm going to explain in the next segment the commitment takes 36 seconds using a single thread on a reasonable machine. And the evaluation to generate the proof only takes 3.2 seconds. So these numbers are actually excellent in practice and are significantly faster than those schemes based on discrete log and bilinear pairing-- for example, the polynomial commitment scheme and the bulletproofs-- because it's not using any group exponentiations. It's linear number of additions and multiplications. So that's very efficient. But apparently the drawback is the proof size. So using this scheme with the square root proof size, we are talking about 49MB concretely. So this is really a big overhead and may not [50:09] be desirable for certain applications. And finally the verifier time is about 0.7 seconds, so that's actually a reasonably fast in practice. So before I conclude this segment, I also want to further discuss several follow-up papers in the literature, and that leads to this polynomial-commitment scheme I'm describing. So actually the key idea of this version of polynomial-commitment scheme came from these two papers. So recall that in the original paper of Ligero and Bootle et al 2017, they were merely describing a way to do this proximity test. And in order to make it work for a polynomial commitment efficiently, it relies on this nice observation and the improvements of the protocol for tensor query IOP, proposed by Bootle, Chiesa, and Groth in 2020. So in this paper, they propose this protocol that I was describing for tensor products and tensor query. And what is that? So to give you an example for this two dimensions, that is exactly the protocol we were describing. So that works for the inner product between a vector f. And you can think of this as the coefficients of a polynomial and another vector, that is generated by the tensor product between two subvectors of size square root d-- so u tensor, u prime. And it only works for this type of inner products, but not the general inner product for arbitrary vectors. And in this paper, it also generalized the protocol to multiple dimensions instead of just dimension two. And using this approach, we can actually achieve a smaller proof size that is order of n to the ne small constant epsilon, that is less than 1. And you can think of the scheme as basically a generalization to a multi-dimensional matrix. And we are performing this proximity test and consistency test recursively, dimension by dimension. And the end result it gives you, this is a smaller proof [52:23] size of order order of n to the epsilon, instead of only square root n. Then with this tensor IOP paper-- in the "Brakedown" paper, they actually introduce this scheme that I was describing earlier in this lecture based on this tensor query. So this is actually the origin of the polynomial commitment. And another important contribution of this paper is it actually proposes another technique to prove knowledge soundness, and that is actually worth mentioning. So recall that an interesting observation of the protocol that I was describing is that it does not need a decoding algorithm of the linear code at all. The prover sends the message of this vector matrix product to the verifier, and the verifier encodes it to get the codeword. So there is no decoding algorithm involved. So because of that, we can actually use any code without an efficient decoding algorithm, and it gives a lot of relaxation on the design space of the code. But unfortunately, in order to prove soundness formally, especially this extractor for knowledge soundness, we need an efficient decoding algorithm to extract the witness of the coefficient matrix from this committed matrix-- that is close to a code word. If the decoding algorithm is not efficient, the extractor won't be of polynomial time and actually doesn't work. So this paper shows you an alternative way to prove knowledge soundness. And the approach is similar to a single protocol, with the rewinding of multiple random queries to extract this coefficient matrix without efficient decoding. So with this contribution, we can finally use any linear code without efficient decoding to build such a efficient polynomial-commitment scheme. [54:22] Another two papers worth mentioning are this Bootle, Chiesa, and Liu in 2021 and then this "Orion" paper by Xie, Zhang, and Song in 2022. And the main contributions of these two papers for this part is to improve the proof size. Recall that the proof size in the version I was describing is square root d, and it's actually concretely very large-- tens of megabytes. So in this paper by Bootle et al. in 2021, they reduced the proof size to poly log n using a proof composition technique combining the tensor IOP with the PCP of proximity proposed in this paper. And the contribution of "Orion" paper is actually to reduce the proof size with a concrete efficient protocol. So the result is it can actually improve the proof size to order of log n square with a proof composition technique, using the code-switching technique proposed in this paper. And concrete speaking, it reduces the proof size for degree d equals to 2 to the 25, from about 50MB to 5.7MB. So this is about an order of magnitude improvement, but still it's actually quite large in practice-- because of the distance of the code and also the design of this entire polynomial-commitment scheme. So because of that, this really gives you a trade off between efficient prover time and the large proof size, and you should choose appropriate schemes for your application. So that's the entire segment for the polynomial commitment based on the linear code. So in the next segment, I'm going to present a concrete construction of a linear-time encodable code, which leads to a linear time polynomial commitments and zer0-knowledge proof schemes. Welcome back to the last segment of the lecture. So in this part, I'm going to talk about linear-time encodable code with a constant relative distance using expander graphs. [56:33] And this code has been used in this interesting line of work to construct SNARKs with a linear prover time. Here I'm talking about the linear number of field additions and modifications, so they can be really efficient in practice. And as I mentioned earlier in this lecture, this line of work was initiated by Bootle, Cerulli, Ghadafi, Groth, Hajiabadi, and Jakobsen in 2017. And there they proposed this ideal linear-commitment model with a square root d proof size. And this is basically the proximity test I explained in the earlier part of the lecture. And later this scheme was further improved by Bootle, Chiesa, and Groth in 2020, to construct an IOP that supports tensor queries. In this scheme, they can actually achieve a proof size of order d to the power of epsilon for any small constants of epsilon. And after that, in this paper by Bootle, Chiesa, and Liu, they further improve the proof size to be polylog d, using the proof composition between a tensor IOP and the PCP of proximity. After that, in this "Brakedown" paper by Golovnev, Lee, Setty, Thaler, and Whaby, they actually use this technique of tensor IOP to build an efficient polynomial commitment, with a proof size of order of a d to the power of epsilon. And also, as mentioned in this paper, they showed how to prove knowledge soundness without an efficient decoding of the linear code. And finally, in our "Orion" paper by Xie, Zhang, and Song, we further propose a code-switching technique to reduce the proof size to order of log d square using a proof of composition and the code-switching technique that is a concretely efficient. But all of these papers are using this single construction of the linear time encoder code with a constant relative distance. So in this part, I'm going to clearly explain to you that the construction and why it can actually achieve [58:37] a constant relative distance. So this code was actually proposed by Daniel Spielman in 1996 and later it was generalized from a binary to a finite field in this paper by Druk-Ishai in 2014. And this code relies on this classical object called expander graphs. So in an expander graph any subset of graph or subgraph can actually connect to many neighbor of nodes in this graph-- and so this is a very good expansion and called expander graph. And here I'm showing you an example of a bipartite graph, meaning that there is a left set of nodes and the right side of nodes. And there are connections between these two sets, but there is no connection within each set. And that is called a bipartite graph. And in this bipartite graph, every node on the left has three outgoing edges connecting to a two nodes on the right-hand side. So the degree of each node on the left is 3. Then this graph actually has a very good expansion, because you can check that every two nodes on the left-hand side connects to at least five nodes on the right-hand side. So that is a good expansion because in total there are three edges from each node. So from a set of two nodes on the left, there are at most six outgoing edges, so it can connect to at most six nodes on the right-hand side. And now it connects to at least five, so the expansion is pretty good. So this gives you an example of the bipartite graph that is a good expander. And this is exactly the type of expanded graph we are going to use to build this linear-time encodable code. So to give you a very kind of rough intuition why we need such an expander graph to achieve a good relative distance-- [60:39] but roughly speaking with such an expander, we are just going to put the message on the left-side nodes. We're going to put each symbol of the message into each node on the left-hand side. And then the way to compute this encoding is for every node on the right, we are going to sum the values of the nodes from the left that's connected to this node. For example, to compute the first symbol of this encoding, we are going to sum up the values in the first node on the left and the second node on the left, because of these two edges. And that's it. That's a very simple algorithm to encode it, just through a summation of the values from the neighbors on the left. And this is actually a linear code, because this way of encoding can be represented as a vector-matrix product between the message and the adjacency matrix of this bipartite graph. So that is the generator of this way of encoding. So that is why it is a linear code. And it is also the encoding of this simple version can be done very efficiently in linear time, simply because we are just going to go through each node and compute the summation on the left-hand side. Because the number of edges from each node is constant, so the running time of this entire encoding is merely a constant times the size of the message. So that's a linear encoding. And the intuition why we need to expand the graph to achieve a constant relative distance is because recall that from the very beginning, I said that the distance of a linear code is equivalent to the minimum weight of any non-zero codeword. So it just suffices to count the number of non-zero codewords for all the messages. And the reason why we need a good expansion is because even if the message has a very small number of non-zeros-- [62:28] for example, there's only a single element of the message is non-zero-- it expands to many nodes on the right-hand side-- in this case, at least three nodes on the right. So one non-zero leads to at least three non-zeros on the right and two non-zero leads to five. So that is amplifying the number of non-zeros from the message to the codeword in order to achieve a good distance of the code. So that's the intuition why we need an expander. But unfortunately this simple encoding does not work. It's actually far away from being a good code with constant relative distance. And it's not hard to see this. Because again, using the example, if the message contains only a single non-zero value, by the requirement of a constant distance the codeword has to have a constant portion of the values to be non-zero. And clearly this is not possible using this simple encoding, because one non-zero can only connect to three nodes on the right-hand side, which leads to three non-zeros in the codeword-- instead of a constant fraction. So this simple way of encoding does not work directly. So the next, I'm just going to show you the formal way of building this linear-time decodable code with the constant relative distance using expander graphs, and also we'll show you why this can actually achieve a constant relative distance. So in order to do that, the first thing I'm going to define is this concept of lossless expander. It's basically a type of expander that has a very good expansion-- almost a perfect expansion among all expander graphs. So in a lossless expander, just to define some notations, we're going to use the size of L to denote number of nodes on the left side. And the size of the set on the right is a constant fraction of L-- alpha times L, [64:23] for a constant alpha. In this example, alpha is actually larger than 1 because the right-hand side is larger than the left-hand side. But in the real expander, we're going to use in this linear code, alpha is actually a value that is between 0 and 1. So the size of the right side is actually smaller than the size of the left side. And then the degree of the node in the left set is a constant g-- and the three in this case. So then with this definition, what is the maximum possible expansion for a subset on the left? OK. If you think about it, if you take any subset of nodes on the left, the number of total edges is exactly g times S. Every node has g edges, and you have S nodes in total. So then at most, you can connect to g times S nodes on the right-hand side. That's the maximum possible expansion. So then we are just going to define this last expander in this way. So we want this expander graph to achieve this maximum possible expansion. And I'm using this capital gamma of S to denote neighbors of this subset of nodes. And the size equals to g to S. So that's the best expansion you can have. But then it turns out there has to be another condition to make it happen. It can't be true for all subsets, simply because we don't have enough nodes on the right-hand side. In total, we have alpha times L nodes on the right. And if this g times S is larger than the number, it can't happen. You don't have enough nodes. So in order to make it happen, we have to have a condition on the size of this subset, [66:05] saying that for all subsets that is less than or equal to alpha times L divided by g, we want the expansion to be maximum. And you can see this is g times S is less than or equal to alpha L. That's exactly describing the condition I was saying. As long as you have enough nodes on the right-hand side, I want maximum expansion. So that is the idea of this loss expander. But then, again, this is actually too good to be true. So that is actually very hard to find such graphs. So in the real definition of the loss expander, we are going to relax this two definitions, two conditions a little bit, but still following the idea I was describing. So in the real definition instead of saying that this expansion of this subset is exactly the same as g times S is the best we can do, we are going to say that it's going to be a larger than or equal to 1 minus beta times g of S, where beta is actually a small constant. And when beta approaches to zero, that is the maximum expansion you want. So beta is a parameter of this loss expander. It's a relaxation. And similarly for this condition, [INAUDIBLE] you want it to hold for any subset S with size less than or equal to alpha times L divided by g. Again, that is too good, and we use another parameter, delta-- small delta-- to replace alpha-- saying that for all subsets of size that is smaller than or equal to this amount, we have this almost perfect expansion. And again this delta should approach to alpha and is, again, a constant. So that is a real definition of a loss expander. And for time being, all you need to remember is that it is a bipartite graph with a very good expansion. Any small subset expands to a large number of neighbors on the right. [67:58] And encoding is we put message on the left-hand side, and we are going to sum up the corresponding nodes with the edges on the right-hand side to get the result of the encoding. So that's the concept of a loss expander. With that, next I'm going to show you an overview of this real encoding algorithm. It's actually much more complicated than just applying this loss expander. It's actually recursive when encoding algorithm. So how can we encode a message? So suppose the size of the message is k. The goal of this type of encoding is to get a codeword of size 4 times k. So the rate is 1/4, is a constant rate. In the first step, we are just going to copy the message directly to be the first part of the codeword. And this is parties of size k. And this is actually a quite common approach in [INAUDIBLE] code. And the code with the first part to be exactly the same as message is called the systematic code. Then, in the second part, we are going to apply this loss expander on this message. And we are going to use a loss expander with these parameters such that alpha equals to 1/2. The size of the red side is only half of the size of the left side. And then we have this good expansion, characterized by a delta and beta. And the result of this applying loss expander gives you a encoding that is of size k over 2. They're going to compute the right-hand side of the nodes using the summation from neighbors of the left-hand side. So that is a vector of size k over 2. Then a very important step of this encoding is that we are going to assume that we already have a good encoding algorithm-- a good linear code-- [69:51] for message of size k over 2. And it already has a very good constant relative distance. And we're going to use it to construct this encoding algorithm for message of size k. And for time being just assume that we have such an encoding algorithm. Then we're going to apply it to the result of this loss expander. And the rate is again the same. It's 1/4. So the result is 4 times k over 2, and that gives us the codeword c1 of size 2 times k. And we're going to put it as the second part of this encoding the codeword. And we're not done yet. Finally, we have another step. We are going to run this codeword c1 through another lossless expander graph with alpha equals to 1/2, and with these parameters and good expansions. And the result of that is half of the size of c1, because alpha equals to 1/2. The size of the nodes on the right-hand side is 1/2. So we end up with another part. We denote it as codeword c2 of size k. And then the final codeword is the concatenation of the message c1 and c2. And the size is k plus 2k plus k. In total it is 4 times k. And that's how we do this encoding algorithm using the lossless expander. And then you may wonder, how can we get this encoding algorithm for the message of size k over 2 with a good relative distance without using this exactly the same encoding algorithm for message of size k over 2. And that is why it's a recursive encoding algorithm. And once you have this vector of k over 2, how do you do this encoding? Well, you put this k over 2 vector [71:36] again here, with all of these parameters divided by 2. [INAUDIBLE] 2, copy it, and then do another loss expander and get a k over 4 and do the recursive encoding step by step. So that is the recursive part of this encoding algorithm. Another thing to highlight is that although we are using two loss expanders with both alpha equals to 1/2, there are actually two different expander graphs because the sizes are different. This expander graphs takes an input of size k on the left side and generates a vector of size k over 2 on the right side. And this loss expander graph takes input-- a vector of size 2k-- and computes a vector of size k. So because of that in this recursive encoding algorithm, we're actually using a sequence of loss expander graphs with similar parameters. Alpha always equals 1/2, and we want the expansions of these lossless expanders to be pretty good, with all these beta and delta and g parameters. So that is the high-level overview of this recursive encoding algorithm using the lossless expander. And to put in a more formal way-- so here is basically a description of this recursive encoding, as I described in the previous slide-- in the chart. So we have a message of size k, and we want to get a codeword of size 4k, such that the rate is constant 1/4. Then we assume that there is an encoding algorithm from k over 2 to 2k already, with a very good relative constant distance-- a constant relative distance, delta. And we also suppose that there is a sequence of expander graphs. And we're using two graphs from this sequence of size k and 2k on the left-hand side, with alpha equals to 1/2. [73:23] Then the encoding algorithm can basically describe by this four steps. We're going to pass this n through the loss expander graph, to get m1 of size k over 2. Then we're going to encode this m1 to get c1 of size 2k using this encoding algorithm from k over 2 to 2k, with a good relative distance. Then we are going to pass c1 through another loss expander to get c2 of size k. And finally, we're just going to concatenate them together to get a codeword of size 4k. And to complete this recursion, we are going to repeat it for k over 2, k over 4, until the message becomes a constant size-- that is, talking about this step-- assuming that how can we-- explaining how can we go from this encoding of k over 2 to 2k. We just repeat this entire encoding algorithm for size k over 2 and then k over 4, until a constant size. So finally, how can we complete this recursive encoding? Once the size of this message becomes a constant, we can actually use any code with good distance for this message-- for example, the Reed-Solomon code. And here, because the size of the message is constant no matter what we do, it won't affect the asymptotic behavior of this code. The encoding time remains constant. And so that is the formal description of this recursive encoding. So next I'm going to show you why this way of encoding can achieve a constant relative distance. So the theorem is saying that the distance of this code, delta prime, equals to the minimum of delta, which is actually the relative distance of this code we use in the middle-- from k over 2 to 2k-- and another parameter delta, or 4g, that depends on the expander graph. And this proof is actually a little technical, [75:22] but the first time I've seen this proof from the paper and also the speleman code paper it was really impressive. And I really wanted to show you the idea of this proof, of the constant relative distance. So yeah, let's do that. So recall that these parameters are actually related to this expander. This delta is the constraint on the size of this subset of the nodes on the left-hand side, and this g is the degree of this node. From the left to the right is a constant f. And also, we have this theta. It depends on delta and g, and it's not used directly in the analysis-- just to remind you that these parameters. And recall that the codeword is the concatenation of the message c1 and c2, where c1 is derived from the expanded graph of m to get m1 and encode it using another good code, with a constant relative distance of delta. So here the higg-level idea of this proof is to actually break it down to several cases. So again, recall that for any linear code the distance between any two code word is equivalent to the weight of a codeword. So we are just calculating the minimum weight of any non-zero codeword to get the minimum distance. So that's what we are trying to prove here. And the first case is actually extremely simple. So we're saying that if the weight of the message is large enough, then we are done. Then the weight of this codeword is good and then there's nothing to prove here, because we are copying this message to the codeword. And then if you're counting the number of non-zeros in this codeword, we already have more than 4k times delta prime number of non-zeros. So the distance or the relative weight of this codeword is already 4k delta prime divided by 4k. [77:31] So that is larger than delta prime already. So we're saying that for all messages there's actually large weights. Then automatically, we get large-weight codewords. So that is a very simple. Then the second case is if this weight of m is less than or equal to this 4k times delta prime, what can we do? So here is where the expander graph-- the loss expander kicks in. So recall that the definition of the loss expander has a condition on the size of the subset of nodes on the left-hand side. And this is exactly the condition where this is actually satisfied. So we can show that if the weight of m is less than 4k times delta prime-- and if we substitute delta prime with this delta over 4g, you can see that it means that the weight-- the number of non-zeros is less than or equal to k times delta over g. That's exactly the condition of this loss expander. Because of that, if we use this S to denote a set of non-zero nodes, then it has to expand to more than 1 minus beta times g times S nodes, on the right-hand side. That is the definition of the loss expander. And once you have this good expansion on the right-hand side, then by a simple counting argument, we can show that at least one node in this neighbor have a unique neighbor in S, which means that this result of this expander m1 must be non-zero. And why is that? There's a simple proof by contradiction. Suppose that you have-- so all the nodes in the neighbor have at least two neighbors in this S, then the total number of edges will be 2 times 1 minus beta times g times S. But in total, you only have g times S many edges, because each node in S has this g outgoing edges as a constant. [79:41] So then you just simply don't have enough edges in this graph. So because of that at least one node in this neighbor have a unique neighbor in S. And in fact, you can actually do a much better bound. Actually, a lot of nodes should have unique neighbors in S because of this good expansion. And the sole reason why we are trying to make such an argument is that we want to show that this result of this loss expander-- we call it m1-- is non-zero. That's all we need. As long as this m1 is non-zero, we are applying this recursive encoding of another good code with constant relative distance of delta-- then the weight of the c1 has to be larger than or equal to 2k times delta. Because of the distance property of this second code, we use it in the recursive encoding. So all we need to prove is that m1 is non-zero. As long as m1 is non-zero, the weight of c1 is actually pretty big. So that is the key idea of this second step. Then actually, in order to finish this entire proof, we are just following this same idea and do it again. So then we can just condition on whether this weight of c1 is big enough or not. So if this weight of c1 is already larger than 4K delta prime, which is exactly the same argument as the first step, then we are done, by saying that the number of non-zeros in c1 is already big enough. So the weight of c-- the codeword c is actually larger than delta prime, and we're good. And else, if the weight of this c1 is actually less than or equal to 4k times delta prime but still larger than 2k delta, then we can apply the argument of loss expander again. The size of this subset is bounded. So because of the condition of this loss expander, we are going to compute c2 using the second loss expander. [81:40] And we can show that because of the unique neighbors, the weight of c2 has to be larger than or equal to 2k times delta prime-- because of this counting argument. We seem to have that many nodes with unique neighbors, and they have to be non-zero. And then summing it up together with this weight of c1-- so the weight of c1 has to be larger than 2k times delta-- we end up with the total weight to be larger than or equal to 2k times delta prime. And that completes the proof for this distance of this encoding. And again, I was saying that this is a little bit technical, but the high-level idea I want to deliver is that we're just proving it case by case. The first case is if the message has enough weight, then we're good. If not, then the condition of loss expander will be satisfied. And then this message will expand to many nodes on the right-hand side. Then, by a simple counting argument, a big portion of these nodes will have unique neighbors from the message, m. And the unique neighbors implies non-zero elements, because you're just summing the value in this non-zero element with nothing else-- and the result has to be non-zero. And then we are just going to apply it again and finally compute this proof, to show that it has a constant relative distance. So that is the proof why it has actually a constant relative distance. So with that, we can actually build this linear-time encoder code using the expander graphs, and that completes the entire description of the encoding algorithm. And the last piece of the puzzle is, how can we find such lossless expanders? Do they exist in practice? Well, it turns out we can actually construct the loss expanders explicitly in a deterministic way. [83:38] And this was proposed in this paper in 2002. But unfortunately, the concrete efficiency of this approach is actually not very good in practice, because it has a large hidden constant in the construction-- namely, you have to find a constant-sized graph with a very good expansion property. And the only way to do it is to do a brute force search, and will lead to a very big overhead in practice. Another approach is to actually sample a graph-- bipartite graph randomly. And as you may know, random graphs tend to have a good expansions. So if you just do that with some good probability, you can actually have these loss expanders. But unfortunately, the probability is only 1 over a polynomial unit, instead of a negligible. So we can't achieve negligible failure probability through random sampling. And this is also not hard to show because actually the lower bound of this failure probability has to be inverse polynomial, simply because the size of the graph is a polynomial n. And your total sample space-- the random space is a polynomial n. And there is at least one graph that is not loss expander. So then the probability of failure has to be bigger than 1 over the poly n. So this is a very simple argument. So then that leads to some improvements of this linear-time encoder code based on expander graphs, in these two papers, "Brakedown" and "Orion." So in the "Breakdown" paper, the proposed improved version of this encoding using random summations instead of plane summations. So I was describing the way to encode the message is to actually sum the neighbors on the right-hand side from the nodes on the left-hand side. So in this paper instead of doing the plane sum, they're going to assign a random weight for each edge in the finite field, [85:35] and then doing a weighted sum based on weights on these edges. And this actually boosts the concrete distance significantly, and they can actually show that the distance is actually very good in practice, but it's very high probability. And another improvement in the "Orion" paper is actually further proposed a testing algorithm to reduce the failure probability of this sampling-- loss [INAUDIBLE] expander. And this testing algorithm is actually based on an interesting connection between the expansion of a graph and the maximum density of a graph. So using this algorithm, we can actually build a testing algorithm to see whether a random graph is a loss expander or not, and the failure probability is reduced from inverse polynomial to a negligible. And you can actually do a rejection sampling to really get a good loss expander with overwhelming probability. So these are the contributions to the linear-time encoder code from these two papers. So yeah, that's everything about this linear-time encoding code. So finally, to put everything together, so in this lecture, I showed you how to build a polynomial commitment using a linear code. And combined with the polynomial IOPs-- for example, the PLONK IOP and the interactive proofs, we discussed in the earlier lectures-- we end up with SNARKs based on error-occuring codes. And they have these nice properties. So in terms of the advantages, they only have a transparent setup. There's no trapdoor and trusted setup in these schemes. And the size of the global parameters is only constant. We only need to sample a hash function from a family of hashes. And the time to commit to the polynomial and to generate the proof is actually extremely fast in practice. [87:36] So it only requires a linear number of field additions and multiplications in the degree of the polynomial. And the schemes are also plausibly post-quantum secure. And another important feature I want to highlight here is that they are field agnostic, meaning that the schemes don't use FFT or bilinear pairings or discrete log, which means that they can actually work on any field you want. So you can actually pick a native field of the computation you want to prove and then run these algorithms-- or run these schemes directly on that field. So that's another nice feature about these schemes. And on the drawback side, as I emphasized several times, the proof size tend to be very big in practice. So in the plain version I described in this lecture, the proof size is square root of d in the size of the polynomial. And [INAUDIBLE] can be all the way to tens of megabytes. And even with these improvements using proof of composition, it can be reduced to a polylog d, or log d square, but still in practice there are several megabytes-- because the distance of code and also the mechanism to construct these polynomial commitments using the code and Merkle trees. So because of this, really depends on your applications and is a trade-off between the poorer time and assumptions and this proof size. So that's the end of this lecture. And in the next lecture, we are going to further discuss the FRI protocol and the STARK construction Thank you for listening.