[00:00] YU FENG: Hello, everyone. My name is Yu Feng. I'm a faculty member at UCSB. I'm also a co-founder at Veridise. My research is mostly on program verification, program analysis, as well as programming languages in general. Today I will be talking about how to secure your ZK circuit with formal method. First of all, I would like to start by stating the obvious, in a sense that bugs in blockchain software can be extremely dangerous. And here, when I refer to blockchain software, this actually ranging from the underlying consensus protocol to zero-knowledge circuit, to smart contract, and all the way to the Web3 application at the top, including wallets, games, you name it. And if you have any logical bugs or security vulnerabilities in any of those layers, the attackers can basically exploit them and steal enormous amounts of money. Here to attach some number to this claim, for instance, a flash loan vulnerability that happened last April in Beanstalk protocol resulting in $182 million worth of cryptocurrency to be stolen. And that denial of service vulnerabilities in the Solana protocol result in a widespread network outage, causing the Solana price dropped substantially within even a single day. And last but also relevant to today's topic, I also want to point out that bugs can also arrive at a level of zero-knowledge proof, which is not very surprising because zero-knowledge proofs are written by humans, and we know that humans all make mistakes. And, for instance, in this case a soundness bugs in a ZK-SNARK proof protocol can allow an attacker to create fake Zcash coins out of nowhere. Now I agree that this might not be the best way to get started as a talk because this sounds a little bit depressing, but one thing [02:11] I would like to get across in this talk is that bugs are actually not inevitable. And if we're using the proper and right formal method in blockchain application development, we can actually eradicate majority of the bugs. And to address that, here's the outline of today's talks. First, I will give a quick overview about some basic concepts as well as terminology in formal methods that I'm going to use throughout the entire talk. Then I will present two projects that applying formal methods to ZK security with complementary skills in the sense that the first project will align, will apply lightweight static analysis that can allow us to find and quickly identify common vulnerabilities in ZK circuit. And then so the second project will be performing formal verification to verify that your ZK circuit is actually mathematically correct with respect to certain properties. And finally I will conclude my talk with some interesting future directions. Excellent. So what is formal method? In a nutshell, formal method refers to a set of mathematically rigorous technique for finding bugs, as well as constructing proof about the correctness of your software. So to be clear, when I talk about formal methods in this context, I'm not just referring to a single technique or a single tool, but rather a class of techniques ranging from systematic testing to the right, to static analysis in the middle, all the way to the right for formal verifications. And I will talk about this in a bit more details later, but generally, the further you go to the right on this spectrum, the stronger guarantee you can get. However, there's no free lunch. In order to get stronger guarantee, [04:14] you also need to put more manual effort. Now at a higher level, we can actually classify formal methods into either being dynamic or static. In particular, so dynamic techniques on the left, such as fuzzing, you can call the executions. They kind of like executing the program on some interesting input and monitor what happens, typically with the goal of finding certain vulnerabilities. In contrast, static technique on the right, such as abstract interpretations or formal verifications, the kind of static staring at your source code and try to reason about the behavior of all possible execution of your program, and then try to make a conclusion whether your system is actually safe or not. In this talk, we'll mostly focusing on static techniques, including abstract interpretations, as well as formal verification. To begin, so I want to say that we cannot actually reason about the exact behaviors of given programs due to the undecidability problems of this context. It's essentially we are solving a haunting problems. So the fact that we cannot reason about the behavior of the actual execution of your program doesn't mean that we cannot reason about the abstract versions of your program. So the idea is essentially to obtain a conservative of over approximations of your original behavior, and hopefully that it is enough to prove the absence of a certain bug of the correctness of your program. And to do that, we typically use abstract interpretation, which is a very popular framework to compute over approximations of programming state. So just to give you a high level intuitions about the insight of an abstract interpretation, here let's use blue regions in the middle to represent the actual program state and notice that the shape is actually highly irregular in the sense that there was no way you can actually precisely [06:39] reason about its actual behavior due to the undecidability of nature. And then on the right hand side, we also use the red region to represent some bad state in the sense that some vulnerabilities or bad behavior that we hope that our original system does not have. And we know that it's very difficult to compute the actual behavior of this irregular blue region, and what we can do is that we can actually systematically compute the over approximate of the original state using the green region. So in this case, you can think of the green region is used to over approximate original behavior of the blue region. And in this case, even with over approximations, we can actually prove that it is actually have no intersections with the best state, which is the region, and in this case, we essentially have a proof that our original program does not do anything bad. And this is great. However, the devil is actually on the details in the sense that in practice, how do you compute and select the right abstractions is highly non-trivial. For instance, like if you look at the abstractions on the left-hand side case, the over-- even here, the over approximation, which is also the green regions, is too coarse green because the green region accidentally overlap with the red regions, which means that if you generate false positive, that actually does not appear in concrete executions, and that's essentially when we say that our analysis actually generate false positive, which is mostly due to the imprecise approximations of our abstract state. On the other hand, for the case on the right, the over approximations on the right hand side is also like undesirable because the green region here only cover a portion of the actual blue state, which means that if you actually generate a false negative, meaning that if you miss like a critical box in this case, now [09:08] we get intuitions, but how does abstract interpretations actually work? How do we compute those abstract states, given concrete problems? So to understand that, let's first review a simple concrete interpreter, which is essentially take input as concrete value, as well as the code snippet that we want to interpret, and it will produce some concrete output. And so given a very simple example, let's say our code snippets only contain one statement, x equal to y plus z. And in this case, it is trivial to obtain to know that x is going to evaluate to 3 if y is equal to 1, and z is equal to 2. That's essentially a trivial concrete interpreter. So in this case, if you can follow the previous concrete interpreter, then I have to say congratulations because an abstract interpreter works exactly like a concrete interpreter, except that it operates over abstract value, which essentially represent a set of concrete value. For instance, in this case, an integer x is essentially can have an abstract value of intervals between a and b, in the sense that we say that x is actually greater or equal than and less than or equal than b. In this case, let's revisit and use the same statement that we see in the previous slide in a sense that given a statement x equal to y plus z, and then in this case, if we know that the abstract value of y is within the interval of a and b, and the abstract value of z is within the interval between c and d, then once we symbolically evaluate this expression y plus z, and we can conclude that the abstract value of x is actually between a plus c, and b plus d. So basically, as I mentioned in the previous slide, the idea is to emulate all possible program paths by performing some formal symbolic executions or symbolic reasoning. [11:34] So in this case, you might ask, how about complex program statement like branches and loops? So basically, it's actually like it's the same idea in a sense that whenever you have a branch or you have doubt about which one you should be choosing, you'll just like a conservative assuming that both paths is going to happen, and then you just merge the outcome of different branches, and collect all the values along different paths. For instance, in this example, it's very difficult to tell statically whether x is going to evaluate to 1 or minus because we don't know what's the actual value of flag because flag can be evaluated to either true or false during runtime. However, what we can do is that we can actually conserve this, say that and conclude that x is actually hold an abstract values that is ranging between minus 1 to 1. It is imprecise, but it actually over approximate the original behavior. So abstract interpretation can be used to capture many nasty bugs in Web3 smart contract. For instance, as some of you might know, re-entrance attack is very dangerous to smart contracts because it actually enable an attacker to repeatedly restore user found without updating the balance. For instance, using this example to illustrate, so here we have the victim contract on the right hand side, as well as the attacker contract on the left hand side. In this case, the victim contract has a restore function, and then the function is trying to transfer a certain amount using the external call. However, so every time it invokes the external call, and then so if you automatically trigger the anonymous callback function, and then this function happens to be one of the functions of the attacker, so in that case, the attacker can actually call this restore function and re-enter this function again to make another external call without updating [13:56] the balance of the account. What does that mean? Meaning that so the attacker can actually create dozens and hundreds of tokens out of nowhere. So how do we capture these bugs? So even though the actual business logic of the smart contract of that defy protocol can be very complex, and we can actually abstractly encode the re-entrance behavior using abstractions such as temporal order, as well as rewrite dependencies. For instance, in this case, we can actually statically abstract the behavior of re-entrance attack by saying that whether there exists an external function call followed by a storage update, like in this case, the code snippet on the waiting contract actually match the pattern we are looking for in the sense that they first make an external call, which is what they hear, and then after making the call, it is trying to do a storage update. So if such case happens, which means that this external call would enable the attacker to re-enter this function again without updating this contract. So abstract interpretation is actually very effective in identifying specific types of bugs and vulnerabilities, such as integer overflows, transaction order dependencies, flash loan attacks, and there's a whole bunch of research and true in both research community in academic, as well as industry. For instance, Slither is one of the probably most popular static analyzer that can encode a bunch of common vulnerabilities. And the Vanguard, like framework, can also enable the attacker or the smart contract developer to essentially encode and capture fractional attack. So abstract interpretation is very effective in identifying specific types of bugs and vulnerabilities. However it cannot guarantee your program is free from logical [16:10] errors. What does that mean? Meaning that, let's say if you have a piece of functions that you want to compute, and then you want to reason about whether your function was actually compute as your original intended behavior, you cannot do that using abstract interpretations, and here that's where we need formal verification. However to use formal verifications, a prerequisite is to provide a formal specification to describe what's the intended behavior. Well, so what do I mean by formal verification? Well, that is essentially a mathematical precise descriptions of the intended program behavior, typically in some form of logic, such as first order logics or temporal logic. For instance, if you want to implement a defined protocol, and then you want to express the correctness of an auction behavior. And then here you can actually write the correctness behavior of your auctions protocol using the temporal specifications on the left hand side. And if you cannot understand what the application is about, that's completely fine because that's essentially not the purpose of today's talk. So basically what the specification is trying to express in English is that-- so imagine I'm a participant of the auction protocol. So in this case, no matter what happens, if I didn't win the bid, if I'm not the winner eventually, then I should eventually get my money back because that's essentially like invariance, I should always maintain regardless like what happens and how it is going to execute and who is going to interact with. So a formal verification to which we usually call it as a program verifier has different meanings as the verifier in ZK protocol. So from the high level perspective, a formal verifier takes the following input. [18:23] The source of bytecode of the target program, specifications that formally describe the property to be verified, and there are other optional annotations such as loop invariance, contract invariance, or some actual domain knowledge and lemmas. So once the program verifier takes those inputs, if you compile those input into a logical formula using a component called verification condition generator, we also call it VC generator. And the VC generator ensures that the code satisfies the specifications if, and only if, the generating formula is valid. And the validity checking is typically done through an off the shelf theorem prover such as SMT solver Z3, Z4, or some kind of interactive theorem prover such as coglin prover, et cetera. And in the end, so the formal verifier is going to produce a yes or no answer. And for the yes case in which the tool was successfully able to prove specifications, it basically mathematically guaranteed that the program matched the desired behavior. So as I mentioned earlier, so VC generator, like verification condition generator as like a compiler that output logical formula. So here is a simple but concrete example to illustrate the basic idea behind it. Suppose we have a function foo that assigns different constraints to x and y. We assign 10 to x and 5 to y, and then at the end, we want to assert that x is greater than 0. So once you pass those programs as well as the application, in this case we use assertion as its corresponding specifications, so the VC generator is going to compile this information and then generate its corresponding first formula in first order logic. So basically what this formula is saying that so if x is equal to 10 and y is equal to 5, [20:45] then it is going to imply that x is going to greater than 0. So now in order to formally verify that this assertion always is true, so basically, the formal verify is going to reduce the problem to checking whether this formula is actually valid or not, valid in a sense that no matter what happens, how you're going to execute these programs, so this formula should always going to be true. And in this case, we know that this assertion always holds if, and only if, f is valid. So formal verification is very nice because it's essentially gives the strongest guarantee when the proof succeeds. However, due to, again, the undecidability nature of formal verifier, when the proof failed, it could belong to one of the following cases. The first case is that we did find a logical error in the sense that this is a true positive. And the second case could be while the proof doesn't proceed is because we need like an actual human input such as loop invariants, such as missing lemmas, such as-- like additional a contract invariance, et cetera. So the last case, which is also quite common, especially in the context of ZK is due to the incompleteness as well as the capabilities of existing theorem prover. For instance, in the previous slide figure, we showed that it's-- when you invoke a formal verifier, it's essentially delegate the job to an off the shelf theorem prover. However, so existing theorem provers such as SMT solver, like Z3 can only handle simple linear integer arithmetic. But as we've seen like in the follow-up part of the talk, so in existing solver we basically choke for reasoning about non-linear arithmetic as well as a large prime over finite fields, which are essentially everywhere in ZK circuit. [23:09] So another thing I want to point out that there are many different flavors of formal verifications, and so far, we talk about unbounded verifications by default, in which we try to reason about the space of all possible behavior of the software. However, this could be extremely challenging in practice because that will also require actual manual effort and actual human input. So another option in practice is that you can also choose to weaken your guarantee using a bounded verifications, so which are pretty common in real world formal verification too. For instance, if you can restrict your input size to certain degree or you restrict the space of your input or sometimes, let's say you have a complex program with a whole bunch of loops in which you don't even know how much iteration-- how many iterations is going to run and whether the loop is going to even terminate, so in this case, you can always-- assuming that the loop is going to execute under a certain constant, for instance, you execute your loop like just twice for every program that you encounter. So like what we've seen in the static analysis case before, so there's also a whole bunch of formal verification tools in the space of smart contract and Web3. And, for instance, we have Certora prover, K-framework from runtime verification, we also have Mythril, Sailfish, et cetera. Now we just show that if you do write a formal verifications, so there are actually formal verification techniques that can check programs against the provided specifications, which is pretty cool right because it's essentially you can use formal verification to find or prove the absence of any bugs or like vulnerability in your programs, as long as you can write the formal verification to specify the bugs you want to check. And in this case, the downside is that it actually require a lot of manual effort for writing specifications. [25:32] On the other hand, if you don't want to provide such kind of inputs in terms of specifications, you can use other kind of static analysis techniques such as abstract interpretation that I mentioned earlier in a sense that if you allow us to look for certain kind of vulnerabilities, and it doesn't require any specification because those like no vulnerabilities are already in code as a part of the analysis in the abstract interpretation such as the example we seen earlier, such as re-entrance attack, integer overflow, flush-on attack, et cetera. Excellent. That's actually concludes my presentation in section 1. So to recap quickly what we have done in section 1 is that I briefly introduce some basic terminology, as well as concepts in formal methods. And I particularly introduced like two different flavors of static analysis. One is based on abstract interpretations, and the second based on formal verification. And we also review their pros and cons as well as their trade off in practice. So with those powerful weapons on hands, we are able to continue our journey, and then we are going to see how we can actually use those techniques to ensure the robustness of our ZK circuit. Let's continue. So in this section, I'm going to start by reviewing some basic components of a typical circuit. So here I want to point out that even though you might observe that most of the example as well as evaluations are based on sitcom and Halo2, so our underlying technique was actually language agnostic in the sense that our technique was actually based on the semantics of the circuit as well as the proven systems, not based on the syntax feature of the ZK DSL, so which means that with sufficient amount [27:31] of engineering effort, the presented techniques should be able to extend it to other DSL and prove system as well. So we are going to first get started by sharing some basic components in ZK as well, and then I'm going to share a taxonomy of ZK bugs based on our large scale study on existing popular ZK projects. And then finally, we are going to propose a system based on abstract interpretations which allow us to quickly identify those vulnerabilities from large scale ZK projects. To start, I will give a brief introduction of how ZK circuits is constructed, and how it works. So first the developer write their design programs in the source languages in let's say sitcoms or Halo2, so the source code consists of two components, the witness computations as well as constraints. So here, the program is then compiled into two parts. The witness generator, which is obtained by translate the original witness computations, as well as polynomial field equations. So here, the polynomial field equation you can think of it's a set of quadratic equations over inputs, output, as well as intermediate variables that appear in your ZK circuit. And, finally the reason that we need those kind of polynomial field equation is that those equations will be transformed into ZK-SNARK, which is comprised of a prover as well as verifier. So notice that here the verifier in ZK-SNARK is different from the prover verifier that introduced in the previous sections. So here a key challenge for ZK developer is that writing their designer programs require writing both witness generation code, as well as maintaining a set of constraints, which are used by the compiler to produce a polynomial equation. And in order to write a correct ZK program, [29:44] the witness generations as well as the constraints should be equivalent. And what do we mean for those witness generations as well as constraint to be equivalent? So let me define that formally. So here, let me introduce some notations. Let's use a program P on the left hand side to represent a witness generation code. And here, the program P is going to take input as some input variable x, and then it's going to return some output variable y. And then, furthermore, we are going to use capital C to represent a system of constraint over x and y. And then here, the constraint is constructed in a way such that for some concrete assignment of x and y, so the constraint system C is going to produce true if it is satisfiable or false otherwise. So given these definitions, what does it mean for a program P, as well as a constraint C to be equivalent? So formally speaking, we say that P&C are equivalent if for any input x to P such that P of x is going to equal to y and x and y also satisfy constraint system C. In other words, the definitions come into two requirements. So first, for any input output pair of the witness computation program P, it must satisfy the set of constraint systems on capital C. And then similarly, the second requirement states that for any pair of x and y, which already satisfy the constraint system C, it also be a valid input output pair of the original program P, which essentially does the witness generation. So the important question is that how can this be violated? It's actually feasible that those get violated. So we are going to look into this kind of possible violations in a bit formal way, and then we are going to break down [32:17] the violations of this equivalences property into two classes since it actually involves two parties. So on one side, we have the first type of violations, which is what we refer as an over constrain bugs, and which happens when there is some input/output pair of the programs-- valid input output pair that satisfy the witness computation P. However, it does not satisfy the constraint [INAUDIBLE].. So in this case, we call it as an over constraint. However, in practice we barely see such kind of over constraint bugs, and it was mostly due to two reasons. And first like the ZK developer, they are not incentivized to over constraint their variables in the circuit because the proof generations actually, it's costly. And most importantly, so in most ZK programming languages such as Circom and Halo2, so those few equations and constraints are actually encode as assertions through the circuit, so which means that once an over constraint bugs happens, which means that it satisfied the original witness computation, but violate those constraints, you can immediately see the assertions during the execution of the circuit, so which means a lot of them are actually being identified during the development phase. However, on the other hands, the second title bugs, which we call under-constrained bugs, is actually much, much trickier. So the second type of violations happens when there exists some pairs of x and y such that it satisfies the constraint system C. However, so this x and y they are not a valid input output pair of the program in the sense that if you plug-in P of x, so the return value is not going to equal to y. So basically, if that's the case as an attacker or malicious user, you can basically claim any bogus fact [34:45] on some any random computations because those computations are accepted are all accepted by the computing system. And this bugs in practice is actually quite dangerous. And why do we care? So to understand this, let's review the original workflow of ZK circuits from source code to ZK-SNARKS. So in the end, so the ZK circuit is going to produce a SNARK, which is comprised of a prover and a verifier. So which means that in this case, if there is an under-constrained bugs in the original source code of the ZK circuit, the verifier can basically accept bad input/ output pair. They are not supposed to be accepted originally and this is not just hypothetical like bugs, and this can actually lead to serious vulnerabilities in applications, including enabled attacker to drain all of the tokens of the protocol as well as allow the user for double spending. So how do we deal with those kind of scenario? Because this is actually a fundamental problem in a sense, it requires reason about the equivalence between witness computation of the ZK circuit as well as constraint system. And before we actually dive into how can we do that using formal verification, which can provide the strongest mathematical guarantee, so let's take a look at how the existing bugs look like, and then whether we can actually capture some of the bugs with some lightweight static analysis. So from the previous sections, we know that a lightweight analysis based on abstract interpretations is very effective in finding bugs for known vulnerabilities. However, to use an existing tool like using abstract interpretation as I mentioned earlier, it requires us to have some sort of a prior knowledge about the patterns of the bugs, the patterns can either be syntax patterns or semantic patterns. So, therefore, in order to tackle these problems, what we do at first is essentially we first collaborate [37:14] through the collaborations from researchers in Xerox PARC and Ethereum foundations. We first like draw a taxonomy of ZK bugs based on a systematic studies over large scale ZK open source projects. And here, so our taxonomy contains multiple categories, and each category has several variants of the bugs identified. So the first categories is called under constraint signal. So as the name indicates, so under signals-- under constraint signal happens when a constraint was evaluated to be true, and so in this case so the circuit was able to essentially like accept everything because-- and then because there was no constraint over those signals, and then here the signal can be either output signal or any public signal that can be accessed by the participants. And let's go over a concrete example. So here, take a buggy implementations of Nun2Bit from the circle library. So here, a Nun2Bit takes as input a prime field n, and then it's going to return its corresponding binary representations using array of n elements. And here, every elements is going to be either 0 or 1. You convert a few elements into its corresponding binary representation as the name indicates. So here, one thing I want to highlight is that so during the implementation of the code, so the developer actually tried to use this kind of triple equal operator to indicate that. So they want to constrain the values of the output elements basically for every-- what constraint is saying that for every elements in the output array, it should either be 0 or 1. Everything looks so far-- looks good so far. However, so there is a subtle off by 1s errors in this case in a sense that in this implementation, the loop bodies use n minus 1 as the loop bound, [39:43] but the correct version should be n. And then if you actually combine those original circuits into the corresponding constraint system as you can see, so using an elements of size 4, so basically, if you look at the constraint systems, so basically output 0 and output 1, they are all being constrained properly in the sense that both outputs are either supposed to be 0 or 1. However, there's no constraints over the last elements which is output 2 because of the off by 1 errors introduced in the original source code. So what does that mean? Meaning that because there is no constraint over the last elements of the array, so the attackers can basically pass any value to the last elements. And then so the proof system is going to accept it because there's no constraint that essentially prevent from accepting this guy. And this can be extremely dangerous in practice. And the second category that I'm going to introduce is called unsafe component usage. So as we probably know, a big or large circuit is typically composed of many small and reusable gadgets or components just like you play LEGO blocks, so why each individual components or gadgets may look safe on its own OK but a box may still happens at a boundary because of incorrect assumptions. So that's what we mean by unsafe component usage, which include both under constraints subcircuit output as well as under constraint circuit inputs. And so let's take a look at concrete example as well. So in this example, the developer trying to implement the withdrawal functions, and then here the withdrawal function is very easy to understand in the sense that you're trying to withdraw a certain amount from your balance. So when-- so the developer was trying to implement the withdrawal functions, is trying to invoke the less than component [42:17] that's essentially compare against the value between the amount and the balance. And, of course, you want to always ensure that the amount should always less than the balance. However, so because the developer forgot to constrain the output values of the less than return, so in a sense, the original-- the correct constraint should be added to assert that there should be an actual constraint to enforce the output value to be always equal to 0 in the sense that-- which essentially state that amount should always less than balance. However, because the developer forget about this constraint, which means that basically there is no restrictions on the restore amount, and then as a result, the attacker can restore more fun than he deserved. So last but not least is the discrepancies between constraint as well as witness computations. And due to the design of ZK-SNARK so not all computation can be directly expressed as constraint in the proof system. So as a result, a bug can arise when the constraint does not faithfully capture a computation semantics. And then here, I'm going to use non-zero inverse as an example to illustrate this box, and then in practice, there's many, many such kind of variants. So here let's take a look at a very simple circuit, which is essentially trying to implement the multiply inverse functions. And the function is very simple in the sense that it's trying to do the divisions between a and b. However, because the division operator is not direct support by the polynomial equations, so the developer needs to construct and simulate this kind of division operator using multiplication for instance, a divided by b equal to output, is going to be equivalent to you do a multiplication-- you assert that the multiplication between output and b is going to equal to a. [44:38] However, this looks fine except that he actually missed a corner case in the sense that-- so this will look equivalent for most of the cases except one corner cases, in the sense that when b is equal to 0. In the original witness computations, when you do like a division by 0, this is actually an undefined behavior that should be rejected and that should be disallowed during the execution of the program. However, because you essentially mimic this kind of computation using modifications, so the modifications that appear in the current constraint system which will actually allow be equal to 0, so which means that in that case, so the circuits and the proof system is going to essentially allow some additional behavior that should be undefined in the original witness computation. And so now we see the problems, but how can we detect those bugs that might potentially like appear in a bunch of other circuit as well? So and in particular, how can we use the abstract interpretation technique that we learned earlier? To do so, we first need an abstractions to quantify the key semantics of ZK circuit that are potentially relevant to our bugs. In particular, we introduce a semantic representations called circuit dependence graph, and as the name indicates, it's a graph represent ZK circuits where node represents signals of different type input and output. And here the edges represent dependencies. Here we use direct solid arrow to represent data dependencies. For instance, in this case, if you have a witness computation that's trying to assign i to o, then we are going to put an edges between from i to o, which essentially encode that. So in order to compute o, it actually has a data dependency of to y. And similarly, we also introduced [47:09] the second type of edges called constraint edges. So here the constraint edge is represented as dash line, and the line is-- the edge is actually undirected in the sense that let's say if you have a constrained system that establish the relationship between a signal o and i, so we are going to put a constraint edges to connect those two signals together. So now let's take a look at an example and how we can actually use circuit dependence graph to represent some kind of a key semantics of a ZK circuit. So given the circuit on the left hand side, what we do is essentially we first construct a node for every single signals that appear in your original circuit. For instance, you have a bunch of input signals and output signals, and we are going to allocate a node for every single signal, and then we use different colors to represent whether there are input and output as well. So once we draw the node, we also need to construct edges. For instance, here we construct the data dependence edges based on the witness computations. In this case. In order to compute the value of the v, signal v, So you are going to do a computation that require b1, b2 and carry. So as a result, so you can see, a direct edges that pointed from carry b1, b2, and both of them will point to b. And similarly, because in addition to data dependency, we also have constraint edges. So in this case, we are trying to establish a constraint that involve variable v, as well as itself. So in this case, we are going to put an undirected self-loop to the signal v, and we are going to do the same thing for c underscore out. And this is the way that we construct a circuit dependency graph based on the original program. [49:23] So once we obtain the abstractions of the original circuit using our circuit dependence graph, we can reduce the vulnerability detections as an instance of query over the graph. For instance, this query at the bottom is to encode the patterns of under constraint output signal that I mentioned in the first patterns of this sections. So we encode this query in terms of datalog. So the detail, you don't have to understand the details, but in English, so what I'm trying to say is essentially, I'm trying to make a query. And what this query is saying, I'm trying to look for whether there exists an under constraint output signal. And in order to be an under constraint output signal, what I'm looking for is that first-- I'm looking for a signal v that is going to be the output signal. And I'm trying to check whether this v is constrained by some constants through-- in the original like circuit dependence graph. And if this output signal is not constrained by any constraints, and it is also not either direct or indirect constrained by any input signals, in this case, we say that we identify a potential on the constraint output signal. And now once you understand those examples, let's group them together and see how a big picture works. We implement the proposed idea as a part of the Vanguard framework which takes as inputs of the ZK circuit either in Circom or Halo2, and so what we do is essentially we are going to take those as the inputs and then convert them into its corresponding circuit dependence graph like what we did in the previous example. So after that, we are going to perform query on the generated circuit dependency graph using a list of query that represent the semantic patterns that we learned earlier. And then finally, the tool is going to report any potential violations on the programmer [51:53] source code. And to evaluate the effectiveness of this approach, we actually collect 258 circuits from 17 popular ZK projects on open source GitHub. And the preliminary result is actually quite promising in the sense that the tool was able to identify a bunch of bugs, and among those bugs identified by the tools, it was able to identify 32 previous unknown vulnerabilities, and we've reported all those bugs to the project developers, and all of-- most of them are being acknowledged. And in addition to the bugs, we also like draw there use this bar chart to essentially give some insight about the distributions of different bugs. So as you can see, it is not very surprising that the developer actually have the most difficulty in maintaining the semantic consistency between considering systems, as well as the weakness computations. Excellent. Now we see an effectiveness of the static analyzer for capturing common ZK bugs, and let's revisit the early Nun2Bit example. As I indicated earlier, so here there's a box that leads you under constraint problems in which the developer forgot to constrain the value of the last elements in the output array. As a result, this will enable the attacker to supply the last elements with arbitrary value, and then it will still be accepted by the verifier. So suppose the developer uses our tool to identify these problems, and then she suggests the following fix on the right hand side. And what you want to do is essentially to figure out whether the current version is indeed correct i.e. it's actually free from under-constrained problem. In this case, we cannot just rerun the previous static analyzer, and then draw the conclusion that the current [54:09] circuit say based on the fact that the static analyzer cannot find anything because we know that static analysis is based on common patterns or prior knowledge. However, what the developer want right now is actually a stronger guarantee, which requires doing formal verification. And this is where the last sections come into play. So before we state the solutions, I would like to revisit the under-constrained problems formally. As I mentioned in the earlier sections of the previous slide, so basically, let's say we have a circuit that contains two parts, the witness computation P, as well as the computing system C. And both of them take x and y, x as an input and y as an output. And here we say that an under-constrained bugs happens if we have a pair of x and y such that xy satisfy the constraint system C. However they are not a valid pair for program P. So in this case, what we want to do is essentially we want to formally prove that a circuit is not on the constraint. And there are multiple solutions for doing that, and their too naive approach is that one, you can essentially perform static analysis. And what we mean by static analysis is that you can essentially define a set of predefined rules which allow you to reason about properties of signal variables. For instance, in this case, we have a simple circuit with input x and output y, and two equations on the constraint systems. Assuming that we know that input x is going to be properly constrained, and so because we know that z is a linear combination of x, and x is well constrained, as a result z is also constrained. And because y is a linear combination of z and x, as a result, we can conclude that y is also properly constrained. Therefore, we conclude that the entire circuit [56:36] is free from under constraint problem. And if you don't want to come up with such kind of predefined rules, a general solution is to formalize the problem as an SMT query. In this case because the under constraint property can be formalized as a first order logical formula, in the theory of finite field, and the solver can directly answer this query, and in this case if the solver returns a satisfiable answer, it means that the manager found a counterexample that demonstrates the under-constrained problem. Both approaches have their pros and cons. Studying and analyzing their constraint, it's very scalable and can allow us to verify large circuits that are safely constrained. However, they often times suffer from false positive in that if they say that a circuit is under constraint, it might not be the case. On the other hand, SMT solver does not suffer the false positive problems because it's based on very precise symbolic reasoning. It has a hard time to scale to large circuits with just a few hundred of constraints. In this section, I'm going to propose a new system called Picus, which takes, as input, a set of polynomial field equations, and automatically tries to verify that the circuit is well constrained. In this case, if Picus prove P is well-constrained, it will return a checkmark indicating that the circuit is safe, and it can also prove the circuit is under constraint, that it's going to return a cross mark. If none of the above case happens, it's going to return unknown. So the key idea behind Picus is that it combines the strengths and power of static analysis and SMT allow it to scale to large circuits while maintaining reasonable precision. At a high level, the static analyzer and SMT phase of Picus interact in the loop, given each other informations that allow them to make progress that they could not otherwise [58:59] do on their own. And let's take a look at the details and see how it works. The static analysis phase of Picus takes as input polynomial field equation P along with a set of signal K that have proven to be well constrained by Picus so far. And at the very beginning, the algorithm will initialize k as an empty. And given those input, the static analysis engine will generate an updated set of constraint K prime, saying that those all the signals in those sets has to prove to be well constrained. So here are the invariants is that k prime should always larger than K to demonstrate that at every iteration, it will grow the set of signals proved to be well constrained to demonstrate that it is actually making progress. So in this case, if the self constraint is going to contain the output signal, then we are going to return a check mark, meaning that Picus is going to terminate and return the conclusion that the circuit is properly constrained. On the other hand, because in my-- lead you certain scenario that cannot be reasons using static analysis, it's going to pass K prime as input to the SMT phase. So the SMT phase has a similar interface in that it takes as input of the constraint P as well as a set K that proved to be well-constrained. And it's going to return a K double prime, which essentially contain a set of signals that prove to be well-constrained as well as K under constraint, which essentially demonstrate a set of signal that prove to be under constraint. The first condition is very similar to the previous one in the sense that if the output signal is going to be the subset of K prime, then we are done in the sense that we just return the circuit saved. And the second condition state that if any of the output signal is going to have a non-empty intersections with the set of signals that proved [61:30] to be under constraint, then we are going to return cross, indicate that the circuit is unsafe. And in the third case, if K is actually equal to K prime, meaning that there was no way that the SMT solver can make progress. And then the reason that lead to this kind of situation is very much because of the limitations of existing finite field solver. In that case, we are going to return question mark indicated that unknown. And if none of those three cases happens, we are going to propagate those information K prime back to the static analysis phase and repeat those process until the tool lead to a decisive answer. And here is the output of Picus when we evaluate the two on the fixed version of the circuit that I mentioned earlier. As you can see, the tool is going to output certain statistics regarding the number of constraints of the circuit, and then finally it's going to print save. And here, the save meanings that Picus has formally verified that the given circuit is guaranteed to have no under constraint signals. To evaluate the effectiveness of Picus, we rounded on 163 circuits collected from popular Circom library, including 50 nights from Circom utils, and 104 from Circom core. So the table at the top shows relevant statistics in terms of number of constraints as well as number of output signals. And as we can see, why the circuits in the util library is relatively small, the circuits in the second core library is actually very, very big. And to compare against the effectiveness of the two, we also compare Picus against two baseline, namely the one that just use static analysis in the middle, as well as the one that just use SMT. And the blue one correspond to the result of Picus. And here the bar chart shows the performance [64:02] of three tools on two different benchmarks set, namely Circom util as well as Circom core. And then y-axis essentially correspond to the percentage of benchmarks that are being solved, and the higher the better. And the conclusion is that Picus consistently outperform both the baseline that based on static analysis, as well as SMT solver. And if you look at the chart result a little bit closer, you realize that while y SMT server is effective on solving simple benchmark, its performance actually dropped dramatically once you increase the complexity of the circuit. That basically concludes those two projects that I mainly want to discuss today, and here I want to bring the early figure of a program verifier again. So while the idea of formal verifications is very general, it has a lot of challenges while applying to complex domains such as ZK circuits. And, for instance, there are many, many open problems such as how do we express specification that involve complex crypto primitives? And as we mentioned earlier, most formal verification tool relying on is underlying theorem prover for checking validity of logical formula. In that case, how can we design more efficient prover that can efficiently reason about finite fields? They are everywhere in the circuit. In the case when the verifications cannot proceed in the sense that it cannot produce a valid proof, how can we actually generate concrete evidence to show the problematics of the circuit? And finally, as I mentioned earlier, so in this world, we mostly instantiate our techniques in the context of Circom as well as a Halo2, and it will be interesting and excited to support other systems as well, such as Plonky2, Nova, et cetera. To conclude, we did a very brief survey about formal methods, which provide powerful tools [66:25] for ensuring software robustness. And then I went over two projects, which demonstrate that how formal methods can help with identifying common vulnerabilities, as well as proving the absence of certain bugs in ZK circuit. I personally believe that ZK security is an extremely important topic yet under study by the research community, so which means that if you are interested in the problem domain, feel free to reach out to me. And here are the references of the talk, and thank you so much for watching the lecture. Have a good day.