[00:00] JUSTIN THALER: Hello. My name is Justin Thaler. And I will be presenting the fourth lecture of this MOOC on zero-knowledge proofs. This lecture describes SNARKs that are designed using so-called interactive proofs as the key building block. So let me begin by reminding you, going back to Dan's lecture, lecture 2, what is a SNARK. Of course, this notion is in the title of this lecture and is essentially the main topic of this course. So SNARK is an acronym. It stands for succinct non-interactive argument of knowledge. It is essentially a succinct proof that a certain statement is true. And here succinct means that the proof is short and fast to verify. So in order to understand exactly what a SNARK is, I think it's helpful to have in mind a specific and very simple and clean application. And Dan used this example in his lecture as well. So the application is that somebody goes and claims that they know a message m that hashes to the value 0. So here the hash function I'm referring to is just some cryptographic hash function that the prover and verifier have agreed upon to use in advance, such as SHA256. OK, so the trivial proof for a statement such as this would be for the proof itself, to just specify the message that the prover is claiming to know, right? Then the verifier can simply evaluate the hash function itself on the message and confirm that the output of the hash on that message is 0. But if the message m is really big, say, it's a video file consisting of one gigabyte or more of data, then we would certainly not consider this proof to be short. And we would not consider the verification procedure [01:49] to be fast either because having to apply SHA256 to this very, very large file is itself a fairly expensive operation. It takes more time than we would like. So yeah, to summarize, this trivial proof system simply specifies the so-called witness for the prover's claim. In this case, the witness would be the message m that the prover claims to know that hashes to 0. And given this witness as the trivial proof of the previous claim, the verifier can directly on its own check that the witness is valid. So valid here would mean it's actually a valid witness for the previous claim. In this case, the witness hashes to 0. OK, so this trivial proof system is never considered succinct. Like these verification costs, they're the baseline. And succinctness, at a minimum, requires that the proof be shorter than this witness and that the proof be faster to verify than this witness. And that's the S in SNARK. It's for succinct. It means better verification costs than the trivial proof system. Now the N in SNARK stands for non-interactive, which means the SNARK proof should be something that can just be written down, posted to a blockchain if it's publicly verifiable. So in particular, a non-interactive protocol, as the name suggests, doesn't require any kind of interaction, any kind of back and forth or exchange of messages between the prover and the verifier. So again, if you have a non-interactive protocol, non-interactive SNARK-- N means "non-interactive" in SNARK. And more over it's publicly verifiable, then this non-interactive proof is just like a short string or something that can be posted to the blockchain for anyone to download in the future and verify the proof themselves. OK, so that's the S and the N in SNARK. [03:47] And then the last three letters in SNARK stand for argument of knowledge. So roughly speaking, this term means that if the statement that the prover is claiming is not true-- for example, the prover does not know a message that hashes to 0-- then it should be computationally infeasible for the prover to find a convincing proof of that false statement. So that is roughly speaking, that means unless the prover can break some, cryptosystem, it should be impossible to find a convincing proof of the statement being claimed unless the statement is actually true. OK, so that's a SNARK, a reminder of what is a SNARK. And again, today, I want to talk about SNARKs that are designed in a multi-step process. And one of the key steps in that process is to first design something called an interactive proof. So let's talk about what is an interactive proof. So interactive proofs are naturally related to SNARKs but not the same. So I'm going to tell you what is an interactive proof and then spend a few minutes trying to clarify the differences between an interactive proof and a SNARK. And then of course, later in this lecture, we'll see how to build on an interactive proof to get a SNARK because what we really want in this course are SNARKs, ideally, zero-knowledge SNARKs. OK, so just as a simple example application such as knowing a message that hashes to 0 was a very nice, clean way to describe what is a SNARK, I want to describe what is an interactive proof via simple example application. So here's the example I have in mind. So imagine a computationally-limited entity, which I'm going to call the verifier the user. The slide says the user might be a small business [05:23] or a government agency or something. Imagine that they want to do some heavy-duty data analysis. And because they're computationally-limited-- they only have a laptop or a smartphone or something-- they're going to ship their data up to the cloud. The cloud is going to store the data. So cloud computing provider will store all that data. It turns out, with a lot of interactive proofs, the user or verifier doesn't even need to store all the data. It only needs to store a small summary of the data. And then later, the user will ask the cloud some question about the data. And the cloud will send back the answer. And so this question is really, what I mean by the heavy-duty data analysis? And in practice, often, this question will be of the form-- the user sends to the cloud a computer program and says, hey, cloud, I need you to run this computer program on my data using your giant cloud-computing cluster. Please run your program on my data and tell me what the output would be. OK, but in an interactive proof, the user doesn't just blindly trust that the answer is correct. Rather, the user starts interrogating the cloud, sending a sequence of challenges, and getting a sequence of responses. And at the end of this interaction, this challenge-response procedure, the user has to accept the answer as valid or reject it as invalid. So in a little more detail and a little more formally, the prover in an interactive proof solves the problem and tells the verifier the claimed answer. The verifier doesn't directly trust the claim. Instead, the prover and verifier then have a conversation, this sequence of challenges and responses, during which the prover attempts to convince the verifier that the answer is correct. [07:05] Now any interactive proof has to satisfy two requirements. The first is called completeness, which roughly says that if the prover is honest and returns the correct answer and then follows the prescribed protocol, the verifier will be convinced to accept. And the second property is a security property, which is called soundness, which says that if the prover lies at the beginning of the protocol and returns an incorrect answer, then the verifier will catch the prover in a lie with high probability, meaning the verifier will reject. OK, now in an interactive proof, the soundness guarantee is required to be what's called "statistical" or sometimes people call it "information theoretic soundness." This means that soundness will hold no matter how hard the prover works to try to convince the verifier that an incorrect answer is, in fact, correct. So in particular, interactive proofs are not based on cryptographic assumptions, their soundness. This is in contrast to interactive arguments. So interactive arguments are only sound against polynomial-time cheating provers. OK, now remember, the A in SNARK stands for argument. So SNARKs are arguments. They are not proofs in the sense of this slide, that is, they are not statistically sound. So in SNARKs, if a cheating prover manages to break some cryptosystem to find a collision in a hash function that should be collision-resistant or to solve the discrete log problem in a cryptographic group, where discrete log is believed to be intractable. Right? Then, that cheating prover can find a convincing, quote, "proof" that the claim it's making is true when in fact, the claim it's making is not true. Whereas in a statistically-sound protocol, where interactive proofs are required to be statistically sound, [08:55] it doesn't matter if the prover spends trillions and trillions of years trying to compute a convincing response to the verifier's challenges. No matter what, with overwhelming probability, the verifier will catch the prover in a lie if the prover started with a lie. So yeah, that is one difference between interactive proofs and SNARKs-- namely, interactive proofs are required to be statistically sound. SNARKs are arguments. They only need to be sound against computationally bounded, that is, polynomial-time cheating provers. The second difference that I want to highlight between interactive proofs and SNARKs is the difference between knowledge soundness and soundness, which I will henceforth, for the next slide anyway, clarify by calling it "standard soundness." OK, so knowledge soundness was the security notion that Dan introduced two lectures ago that SNARKs have to satisfy. So let me remind you what these notions are and compare what they mean in the context of a specific problem called circuit satisfiability, which Dan talked about as well. So in the circuit satisfiability problem, the prover and verifier have agreed upon some circuit C and some public input x. And what the prover is claiming in an interactive proof or argument is going to depend on whether the argument is satisfying soundness or knowledge soundness, argument or proof. So if the protocol is sound, then essentially, what the prover will be claiming is that there exists a witness that causes the circuit to output 0. So that is evaluating the circuit on the input x, which-- x is the public input known to prover and verifier, followed by the witness w, causes the circuit to spit out 0. Knowledge soundness in any knowledge-sound protocol, [10:52] the prover is claiming to actually know such a witness w. So to repeat that one more time, in a knowledge-sound protocol, the prover is claiming to know a witness w such that evaluating the circuit on x followed by w results in the output 0. Whereas in a sound protocol for circuit satisfiability, the prover is only establishing the existence of such a witness w. It is not establishing that it necessarily knows that witness w. OK, so in the context of circuit satisfiability, knowledge soundness is a strictly stronger requirement. It's a stronger requirement to demand that the prover know w than that the prover simply convince the verifier that some w exists, but not necessarily that the prover knows it. OK, I do want to clarify that there are situations where soundness, standard soundness, is a meaningful notion and knowledge soundness is not just as there are also situations where knowledge soundness is a meaningful notion but standard soundness is not or is sort of trivially satisfied. So let me give an example of each. So an example of a situation where standard soundness is meaningful but knowledge soundness isn't is actually exactly the example I gave to introduce the notion of interactive proofs. And really, this applies to any setting where there's no natural notion of a witness for the prover's claim. OK, so again, in the example I started with, the verifier asked the prover to run some expensive computer program on some piece of data. And the prover comes back and says, hey, I ran your computer program on the data. And here's the output. The output is the number 42, right? So there's no natural notion of a witness for this. It's just a claim, and the claim is either true or false, right? So standard soundness makes sense here. Standard soundness requires that if the prover's claim is false, [12:48] then the verifier will reject the claim with overwhelming probability. Knowledge soundness just doesn't make sense because there's no witness that the prover is claiming to know here. It's just making a claim. The output of the computer program on x is 42. OK, so this is a situation where standard soundness is a meaningful notion but knowledge soundness is not. In contrast-- or I should say similarly, there are also situations where knowledge soundness is a meaningful notion but standard soundness is not or is trivially satisfied-- for example, if the prover claims to know a secret key that controls a certain Bitcoin wallet or if the prover claims to know, like the example from Dan's lecture, a preimage of the hash output 0. So if the hash function is surjective, then a witness for this claim always exists, right? And in fact, there may be many, many, many witnesses for this claim always, regardless of the output. Most cryptographic hash functions are surjective. So if the prover claims, hey, there exists some message that hashes to 0, well, that's a trivial claim. So the verifier can just ignore the prover and accept. And that will be a sound protocol, right? But it won't be knowledge-sound because it's completely trivial, the protocol. It's certainly not establishing that the prover actually knows a witness, knows a preimage of 0, knows a secret key that controls a certain Bitcoin wallet. OK, so in many-- I would say, even most cryptographic contexts where interactive proofs or arguments might be getting applied, again, proving that a private key corresponding to some public key, that is a secret key that controls a Bitcoin wallet or something like that. [14:36] Really, knowledge soundness is what you want. But so in summary, there are settings where soundness is a meaningful notion but knowledge soundness isn't. There are also settings where knowledge soundness is meaningful and standard soundness isn't. When both are meaningful notions, knowledge soundness is a stronger notion and in fact is the notion one would want in most cryptographic applications. And that is why this course is about SNARKs with a K. So SNARKs that don't satisfy knowledge soundness are called SNARGs with a G at the end. And people study them as well. But they're not really what you want in most cryptographic applications. You really want the prover to know a witness for the claim being made. OK, the final difference that I want to highlight between interactive proofs and SNARKs are that SNARKs are non-interactive-- that's what the N stands for-- and interactive proofs are interactive. Interactive proofs and arguments are interactive. And a key consequence of their interactivity is that these interactive proofs and arguments are only convincing to the party that is choosing and sending the challenges to the prover. OK, so if I am watching some verifier send a bunch of challenges to a prover and get back a bunch of responses and these are sent in an interactive way-- so the first challenge goes to the prover and the prover responds, the second challenge goes to the prover, the prover responds-- I, watching this interaction occur, have no way of knowing for sure that the verifier is really selecting the challenges, as the verifier should be, for soundness to hold. Typically, that's going to just mean the challenges should be uniform random coin tosses. [16:29] And I can't know for sure, unless I am myself the one choosing those challenges, that those challenges are truly random. I can't know for sure that the verifier didn't collude with the prover in advance and tell the prover what the challenges would be. And in all of these interactive proofs and arguments, if that were to happen, it'd be very easy for the prover to come up with convincing responses to the challenges if it knew at the start what the challenges would be. So what this means is for these interactive protocols, interactive proofs, and arguments, each run of the interactive protocol only convinces the verifier sending the challenges, which means if there are many different parties that want to verify the claim the prover is making, the prover would have to convince each one separately by interacting with each one separately. Now this would render the protocol as pretty much useless in many blockchain applications, where we really want these proofs to be posted on chain, right? The prover is proving something to the blockchain. The prover is proving it correctly ran some expensive computation off-chain and posting the proof to the blockchain. So we want every blockchain node in the world to be able to verify the proof. So this interactive protocol is only being verifiable by the parties sending the challenges, and to the prover, just doesn't work in blockchain settings. But fortunately for public coin protocols, as both Shafi and Dan mentioned, we have a solution to this issue, which is we can apply the Fiat-Shamir transformation to take the interactive protocol and simply render it non-interactive and publicly verifiable. And indeed, that's how all the protocols I want to tell you about today are designed. We first design an interactive public coin protocol. And then we render it non-interactive and publicly [18:26] verifiable by applying the Fiat-Shamir transformation, which essentially just replaces the verifier's random challenges in the interactive protocol with hashes of the messages that the prover has sent in the protocol up to that point in the protocol, right? So the verifiers, say, third random challenge in the protocol, if you Fiat-Shamir it, it would actually be determined by hashing the first two messages that the prover sent to the verifier. And in that way, the Fiat-Shamir protocol is completely non-interactive because the verifier never actually has to send any challenges to the prover. The challenges are effectively determined via hashing alone. And the prover can do the hashing itself. It's kind of intuitively a way to make the challenges sent by the verifier random-like, despite the fact that the verifier itself is not choosing the challenges. That's a very rough intuition for the Fiat-Shamir transformation. We will probably go into more detail about the Fiat-Shamir transformation later in the course. OK, so with all of that out of the way, I have finished describing interactive proofs and highlighting the differences between interactive proofs and SNARKs. And to summarize in a sentence, the three differences are, interactive proofs are interactive, SNARKs are non-interactive-- that's what the N means. The second difference is that interactive proofs are information theoretically secure, also known as statistically secure. SNARKs are arguments. And the third difference is SNARKs are knowledge-sound, whereas interactive proofs do not have to be knowledge-sound, and, in fact, often are applied in settings where knowledge soundness even is not even a meaningful notion. [20:11] And then those first two differences, interactivity versus non-interactivity and computational soundness versus statistical soundness, those differences go away if we're using the Fiat-Shamir transformation to render a interactive proof non-interactive. OK, with the definition of interactive proofs and how they compare to SNARKs out of the way, we can finally begin discussing how one would take an interactive proof and build on top of it to obtain a SNARK. So let's talk about this in the context of SNARKs for the circuit satisfiability problem. Remember, this means the prover is claiming to know a witness w that causes the circuit C to output 0. And the trivial proof system for circuit satisfiability is once again, for the verifier to just simply receive the witness w from the prover and then check on its own that it causes the circuit to output 0. And there are two problems with this, both of which cause us to not consider this trivial proof system to be succinct. The first is that the witness might be too long. We want the proof to be shorter than having to specify the entire witness. And the second is that evaluating the circuit on the input x followed by w may be too hard. We want the prover to be faster than that. So we can very directly use an interactive proof to address the second issue of speeding up the verifier. So after the prover sends the witness to the verifier, we can use an interactive proof to allow the prover to prove that w satisfies the claim property, that is, evaluating the circuit C on input x followed by w equals 0. OK, this is exactly the kind of setting that I described in the example introducing interactive proofs, where the verifier used the interactive proof to offload [22:13] a challenging computation, such as running an expensive computer program or evaluating a specific circuit on a public input such as w to an untrusted prover. So here, by the prover sending w to the verifier, w becomes public. It becomes known to both the prover and the verifier. So we could use an interactive proof to force the prover itself to do the hard work of evaluating the circuit on x followed by w and ultimately prove to the verifier that it's doing that computation correctly. So this will save the verifier time compared to the trivial proof system because we do have very good interactive proofs for circuit evaluation. However, it still requires the prover to explicitly send w to the verifier. So the proof is still too long. So the idea is in the actual SNARK, rather than the prover explicitly sending the witness to the verifier, the prover will instead succinctly commit to the witness using a cryptographic commitment scheme, right? And then just as in the first suggestion at the top of this slide, we can use an interactive proof to allow the prover to prove to the verifier that w satisfies the claim property. The problem is that now the interactive proof verifier needs to know some information about w to verify this interactive proof. And it doesn't know w because the prover has not sent it explicitly to the verifier it has merely cryptographically committed to W. So what we'll do is insist that our cryptographic commitment scheme have built-in functionality that allows the prover to reveal just enough information about the committed witness to allow the verifier to perform the necessary checks in the interactive proof protocol. [24:06] So we're essentially using the cryptographic commitment scheme to more or less simulate running the proposal in the first bullet point of the slide, whereby the prover sent w to the verifier, and then they applied an interactive proof to prove that w satisfies the claim property. We're essentially simulating that protocol but without the prover explicitly sending w to the verifier. And we're using cryptography to avoid requiring the prover to explicitly send w to the verifier. So the prover will merely commit to w. And then they'll run the interactive proof. And then the prover will reveal just enough information about the committed witness to enable the verifier to perform the necessary checks in the interactive proof. That will give us a succinct interactive argument. And we'll render the argument non-interactive via the Fiat-Shamir transformation. And that will give us the SNARK. OK, so now there is just a little more I want to say before I tell you how interactive proofs actually work. Specifically, I want to give you some sense of how these cryptographic commitment schemes work. Dan discussed this briefly during lecture 2. He described these commitment schemes as functional commitments. So there are several different examples of functional commitments that Dan described. For example, there are polynomial commitments, multilinear polynomial commitments, and vector commitments. In a polynomial commitment scheme, the untrusted prover is able to commit to a univariate polynomial f of degree at most d. So this is a way for the prover to bind itself succinctly to a univariate polynomial. And then later if the verifier requests [25:58] to know the evaluation of that polynomial at a specific point r, the prover can reveal f of r and provide a proof that the revealed evaluation is indeed consistent with the committed polynomial. Similarly, if the prover wants to commit to a multilinear polynomial f in, let's say, k variables, a multilinear polynomial commitment scheme will enable this, right? So the prover can send just a single hash value or group element often. And that will serve as the commitment to the multilinear polynomial or the univariate polynomial. And then later if the verifier requests to learn an evaluation of the committed polynomial at a specific point r, the prover is able to reveal the requested evaluation and prove that indeed, the revealed evaluation is consistent with the polynomial that was committed. OK, and then a functional commitment scheme that many, though not all polynomial commitments and multilinear polynomial commitments build on, is something called a vector commitment. So in a vector commitment, the prover commits to a vector, say, of length d. So it has d entries, u1 to ud. And then when the verifier later asks the prover to reveal a specific entry of the vector, such as the i-th entry of the committed vector u sub i, the prover can indeed reveal the i-th entry of that committed vector and provide a short proof that the revealed value u sub i is indeed consistent with the committed vector, that is, there is a vector u1 to ud that lives inside the commitment. And ui is exactly the i-th entry of the vector that lives inside the commitment. OK, so I want to tell you in detail about how popular vector commitment schemes work, particularly this famous and fundamental vector commitment scheme called a Merkle tree. [28:01] And then I'll sketch how one can use a Merkle tree to try to get a polynomial commitment or multilinear polynomial commitment scheme, although I won't cover all the details. And later lectures will be devoted to exactly that topic. OK, so here's a Merkle tree. A Merkle tree is a way for the prover to commit to a vector. So in this example, the vector the prover wants to commit to is just the letters that spell out the words "MY VECTOR." OK, so Merkle trees make use of a collision-resistant hash function, which is capable of taking any two entries of the vector and hashing them to get out a hash value. You can also feed into the hash function two hash values to get out another hash value. OK, so this enables you to build a hash tree over the vector. So the data structure here has, as the leaves of the tree, the entries of the vector to be committed-- in this case, the letters that spell out "MY VECTOR." Right then, every pair of adjacent letters in that vector are paired up and hashed to get the hash values on this slide, m1, m2, m3, m4. m1 is obtained by hashing M and Y. m2 is obtained by hashing V and E and so forth, right? So that will give you the values of this tree that live just above the leaves. And then to obtain the hash values that live just above those nodes of the tree, you pair up adjacent hash values and hash them. And you just keep doing this until you compressed the entire vector living at the leaves down to a single hash value at the root, right? So again, m1 is the hash of the first two leaves. m2 is the hash of the next two leaves and so on and so forth. Then one layer up in the tree, h1 is the hash of the first two hash values but below that level and so forth. So every level of the tree, you are having the number of hash values. And after logarithmically many levels, [30:06] there is just a single hash value. We call that the root hash. And that hash is the commitment to the vector that lives at the leaves. OK, so the prover, to commit to the vector at the leaves, simply sends to the verifier one hash value, the root hash. OK, then if later the verifier says, hey, prover I want to know, let's say, the sixth entry of the committed vector-- so in this example, that would be T-- the prover can provide to the verifier the letter T, which is the sixth entry of the committed vector. The prover also has to provide a proof that T is indeed the sixth entry of the committed vector. Sometimes we refer to that proof as authentication information because it allows the verifier to confirm or authenticate that the answer returned by the prover is indeed the answer that the prover should return. That is the sixth entry of the committed vector. What is the authentication information in a Merkle tree? Well, you take the root-to-leaf path that-- you walk from the root hash of the tree down to that leaf. You take every node in that path. And you ensure that the verifier has enough information to compute exactly the value of that node, OK? So let's start at the leaf T, right? So the parent of that leaf T on the leaf-to-root path is the hash m3 of C and T, that is the sibling of T, which is C and T. So the prover provides C as part of the authentication information, which enables the verifier on its own to compute the hash value m3. Then in addition to that, the prover provides the hash value m4, which allows the verifier on its own to hash m3 and m4 and thereby compute the hash value h2. And then finally, the last piece of authentication information is the hash value h1 because given h1, the verifier can hash h1 and h2 and confirm that the result is equal to the root hash k1. So what's happening here is the prover [32:28] is sending exactly enough information to the verifier to enable the verifier, on its own, to compute every hash along the root-to-leaf path, that is, the path between the root hash that was the commitment to the committed vector and the requested leaf that is the requested entry of the committed vector. And the verifier just confirms that the root hash that it computes via the authentication information is equal to the commitment, that is, the root hash that the prover sent in the commitment phase. Now the key point here is that the Merkle commitment is binding in the sense that once the prover sends a root hash to the verifier, thereby committing to a vector, in order for the prover to open any particular leaf up to two different values would require the prover to identify a collision in the hash function. And we are assuming that it is beyond the computational capabilities of anyone in the world today to compute collisions in this hash function. So the idea is that in order for a prover to open a leaf, such as this six-leaf here up, to two different values, say, T and T prime, the prover would have to identify authentication information that passes the verifier's validity checks for both values T and T prime. So that means providing values for the sibling of T and T prime, values for this hash value m4 and this hash value h1 so that the verifier's checks in both openings pass. And this requires identifying a collision within the hash function because the leaf opening T and T prime are not the same, yet the root hash for both opening proofs must be the same. And so if we have a different value-- two different values for the leaf being opened and then to authentication proofs, say, C, C prime, m4, m4 prime, h1 and h1 prime, then somewhere along the leaf-to-root path, we must have a hash collision because we either have that C and T and C prime and T prime hash [35:12] to the same value, in which case, there's a collision. Or if they don't, then we must have that m3 and m4 as well as m3 prime and m4 prime hash to the same value. Or if not, we must have that h1 and h2 as well as h1 prime and h2 prime hash to the same value. We know that at least one of these hash values on the root-to-leaf path represents a collision because we start with different values at the leaves, but we wind up with the same value by the root. So there has to be a hash collision somewhere along the root-to-leaf path for the leaf that the prover is able to open to different values. That is a contradiction if the hash function is collision-resistant. And therefore, as soon as the prover sends the committed hash-- the commitment root hash k1, there can only possibly be one value that the prover is able to open each entry of the committed vector to. Hence, Merkle trees represent a binding commitment scheme for vectors. OK, now these opening proofs, in summary, they consist of the sibling hash of every node along the root-to-leaf path for the leaf that is requested to be opened. Because this tree has depth logarithmic in the length of the committed vector, that means these opening proofs consist of logarithmically many hash values. And to verify them, the verifier has to evaluate the hash function logarithmically many times. Now let's discuss briefly how we might try to use this vector commitment scheme given by Merkle trees to obtain a polynomial commitment scheme. This attempt will not actually work. But it will be illustrative and give a sense of how many polynomial commitment schemes actually work. But again, there will be a gap in terms of the security properties of this attempt at a polynomial commitment scheme [37:29] that I'm about to describe to you. OK, so suppose we want to commit to a degree d polynomial defined over the finite field with seven elements. Let's say d is 3. I don't know. It won't actually come up in this example, a specific degree. Yeah, so let's call f the degree d polynomial that the prover wants to commit to. So one way we could try to do this is consider the vector consisting of all evaluations of f. So that is for each of the seven field elements, we can have an entry of the vector, the evaluation of f at that field element. So if the field elements are 0, 1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6 because there are seven elements in the field, the prover can simply Merkle commit to the vector consisting of f0, f1 up to f6. So that is all seven evaluations of f comprise the vector that gets Merkle committed. Now when the verifier says, hey, prover, I need to know, let's say, f of 4, I need to know f evaluated at field element 4, the prover can reveal that evaluation by simply providing a Merkle authentication proof for the fifth leaf in the tree because that fifth leaf contains f of 4. So there are two issues with this attempt at a polynomial commitment scheme, OK? The first is that there is a leaf in this tree for every element of the field over which the polynomial is defined. And in SNARKs, we often like to work over pretty big fields, let's say fields of size at least 2 to the 64th generally, if not always. So that is a pretty big vector for the prover to compute and materialize in its own head and then Merkle hash. So even if the verifier only ever opens up [39:34] a handful of leaves of this Merkle tree, it might be very efficient for the verifier because each of those opening proofs is only logarithmic size. And log of a pretty big size like 2 to the 64th is still reasonable. It's still 64 hash values roughly. But for the prover, it's really bad because the prover has to enumerate every possible evaluation of the polynomial to be committed and then Merkle hash the resulting vector. OK, so what we'd really like is a prover that runs in time proportional to the degree of the committed polynomial and not the size of the domain of the committed polynomial because in general, the size of the domain of the committed polynomial may be huge and it's the degree that is not that big. So that is one issue with this proposed attempt at a polynomial commitment scheme. It is the prover is far too inefficient. Another issue, which is even more important , is that the verifier has no guarantee from the Merkle tree that the vector that is committed actually is the evaluation vector of a degree d polynomial, OK? So the Merkle tree binds the prover to some vector but provides no guarantee as to any structure within that vector. OK, so for this to be a polynomial commitment scheme, the prover would have to somehow separately convince the verifier that all of the leaves of the tree actually consist of evaluations of a degree d polynomial and are not just some arbitrary list of field size many field elements. So essentially, this proposed commitment scheme is not a polynomial commitment scheme because it binds the prover to some function f but provides no guarantee whatsoever that function f is actually a degree d polynomial. So later in the course, we'll provide ways to address both of these issues [41:39] so that the prover is actually bound to a degree D polynomial. And moreover, the runtime of the prover to commit to that degree D polynomial is proportional to the degree of the polynomial and not the size of the domain over which the polynomial is defined, which can be much, much larger. So with all of that out of the way in terms of what cryptographic commitment schemes tend to look like to turn our interactive proofs into SNARKs, I can finally start talking about how to design efficient interactive proofs that we then ultimately will turn into SNARKs as sketched in the section of this lecture that just ended. To do that, I have to introduce some important technical notions. One is to recap a certain technical lemma Dan covered in lecture 2, which is called the Schwartz-Zippel-Demillo-Lipton lemma. OK, so this is a statement about low-degree polynomials. In the univariate case, it's actually something that is covered in eighth-grade algebra in many curricula. And it simply states that if p and q are distinct univariate polynomials of degree at most d and we evaluate p and q at a randomly chosen input, the probability that they agree at that input, despite not being the same polynomial, is at most their degree over the size of the field. So another way of saying this is simply that any two distinct degree d polynomials p and q can agree on at most d points. The Schwartz-Zippel-Demillo-Lipton lemma itself is a multivariate generalization of that, which says that if p and q are distinct l-variate polynomials for where l might be much greater than 1 and their total degree is at most d, then if you evaluate them both at a randomly chosen point, the probability they agree at that point is at most their total degree over the size of the field that they're defined over. Here, total degree refers to the maximum sum of degrees of all variables in any term. [43:50] So for example, the polynomial x1 squared times x2 plus x1 times x2 has total degree 3 because the first term has degree 2 in the first variable and degree 1 in the second variable. And those degrees sum to 3. Now generally speaking, interactive proofs tend to use within them multivariate polynomials rather than univariate ones. That's why we're bringing up the multivariate Schwartz-Zippel-Demillo-Lipton lemma. And roughly, the reason multivariate polynomials turn out to be so useful in interactive proofs is that by using many variables-- think 30, 60 variables, something like that-- we are able to keep the total degree of the polynomials that arise within the protocols quite low. And that in turn ensures that the proofs are short and fast to verify. Whereas if we try to design the protocol using univariate polynomials rather than multivariate ones, we'd wind up with very large proofs that take a long time to verify. So that is why we're introducing the Schwartz-Zippel-Demillo-Lipton lemma. And that also motivates why we're about to consider on the following slide l-variate functions rather than univariate functions. So yeah, this following slide is a little technical. But I will make it much more intuitive and precise with the picture just one slide hence. So just bear with me. So I need to introduce just two technical notions, which are called polynomial extensions and a particular kind of polynomial extension called a multilinear extension. All right, and having already asserted that interactive proofs tend to use multivariate polynomials in their design, it shouldn't be too stunning for me to say that I want you to consider a function f defined over l variables, where l might be more than 1. [45:53] And f in particular, it's only defined over inputs that are 0, 1 valued, OK? So f takes l bits as input, that is, l 0, 1 valued inputs, and maps each such input to a field element. An l-variate polynomial, g, defined over the field, big F, is said to extend little f if f and g agree at any point at which f is defined. Whereas the domain of f is 0, 1 to the l, the domain of g is much bigger. Its field to the l. But g is said to extend f if f of x equals g of x for any x at which f is defined. OK, so we think of g as extending the domain of f from 0, 1 to the l to field to the l. And this domain field to the l of g may be vastly bigger than the domain 0, 1 to the l of little f. That's because interactive proofs often work over fairly large fields of size, say, 2 to the 64th or 2 to the 128th or even 2 to the 256th or so. Whereas the number of inputs to f is 2 to the l because that's how many bit vectors of length l there are. The number of inputs to g, so the domain size for g, is field size to the l, think of that as like 2 to the 128th to the l rather than 2 to the l. OK, now a basic fact, which I won't prove but I might be able to say a little bit about why it's true, is that any function little f with domain 0, 1 to the l actually has a unique extension that's multilinear. Remember, multilinear means that the degree of the polynomial is at most 1 in each variable. So we'll denote the multilinear extension of any function little f by f twiddle, OK? Note that an l-variate multilinear polynomial can have up to 2 to the l coefficients because there are 2 to the l different monomials with degree at most 1 in each variable. The total degree of a multilinear polynomial such as f twiddle can be vastly smaller than the number of coefficients that it has. [48:26] This is in contrast to a univariate polynomial where if a univariate polynomial has degree d, then it can have at most d coefficients. The ability of the total degree of a multivariate polynomial to be much lower than the number of coefficients is exactly why multivariate polynomials are so useful in interactive proofs. OK, so let us see this notion of extension polynomials, and multilinear extension polynomials in particular, depicted pictorially. So on this slide, I have drawn a two-variate function defined over bits, so 0,1 by 0, 1. So there are four inputs to this function, namely 0, 0; 0, 1; 1, 0; and 1, 1. And the function, as depicted on the slide, little f, maps 0, 0 to the field element 1, 0, 1 to the field element 2, 1, 0 to the field element 8, and 1, 1 to the field element 10. OK, now here is its multilinear extension. So there is a row in this picture for every field element and a column in this picture for every field element because the domain of the multilinear extension polynomial is field by field. So if the field has size 2 to the 64th, then there would be 2 to the 64th rows and 2 to the 64th columns. But you can see that the top left corner, the top 2 by 2 square of the evaluation table of f twiddle is identical to the evaluation table of f. So in this sense, f twiddle is extending the domain of f from 0, 1 by 0, 1 to field by field. In fact, I will tell you an explicit expression for f twiddle rather than just listing a subset of its evaluations. So here is f twiddle so I have written it as a sum of four terms up here. In fact, I am depicting a process called Lagrange interpolation, whereby we define f twiddle specifically to have the behavior that f has on the four inputs on which f is defined, namely, 0, 0; 0, 1; 1, 0; and 1, 1. [50:56] And essentially, what we've done is gone through each one of those four inputs and introduced a term to ensure that f twiddle has precisely the right behavior at that input. So for example, this first term maps the input 0, 0 to 1 and maps all other Boolean-valued inputs to 0 because if either x1 or x2 is 1, then you get a factor 0, which kills the entire term, OK? So the behavior on the four points that f is defined of this term is exactly what we want to ensure the correct evaluation at the input 0, 0 because it maps minus 0, 0 to 1. And it simply does not affect the evaluations of any of the other four inputs at which f is defined. Similarly, this term maps input 0, 1 to 2 and kills all other 0, 1 valued inputs, right? So this term is used to ensure that f twiddle of 0, 1 is 2. And the term does not affect the evaluations of f twiddle at any of the other points that matter. For example, this term evaluated at 0, 0 is 0 because of the x2 factor. And hence, adding this term to the first term does not alter the fact that the first term has exactly the desired behavior at 0, 0 because this second term evaluates to 0 at input 0, 0. Similarly, this third term maps input 1, 0 to 8 and maps all three other 0, 1 valued inputs to 0. And finally, this last term maps 1, 1 to 10 and evaluates to 0 at all other Boolean-valued inputs. So in this way, we can check that this expression on the right-hand side here has exactly the desired behavior at the four inputs where f is defined, 0, 0; 0, 1; 1, 0; and 1, 1. And moreover, it's very clear that it's a multilinear polynomial just because each and every one of these four terms has degree at most 1 in each variable. And hence, the sum of the four terms does as well. So this must be the unique multilinear extension of f. OK, now f has other extension polynomials as well, which are higher degree, which [53:38] are not multilinear. Here's just one example. So this is a-- let's call it a quadratic extension of f. So it also has the correct behavior, the same behavior as f at the four points at which f is defined. But it's not the same polynomial as f twiddle. They're just different polynomials. And only f twiddle is multilinear. This quadratic extension, because it's quadratic, is not multilinear. Now you may be wondering why multilinear extension polynomials come up in interactive proof design. So this will become very clear by the end of the lecture. But in a sentence or two, the intuition is that the multilinear extension polynomial of a function f defined over 0, 1 to the l can be thought of as a distance amplified encoding of f, in the sense that if two functions, f and f prime, defined over 0, 1 to the L differ at even a single input, so out of all 2 to the l inputs to f and f prime, if there is even just one input at which they disagree, then their multilinear extension polynomials disagree at almost all inputs in field to the l, OK? So they somehow take tiny differences between functions defined over 0, 1 to the l. And these multilinear extension polynomials blow up, amplify those tiny differences into extreme differences that are very easily detectable by only inspecting a tiny fraction of the evaluations of the encodings, that is, it will be enough to evaluate f twiddle and f prime twiddle at a single randomly chosen point in order to somehow detect that f and f prime disagree even if they only disagree at a single input. So that directly follows from the Schwartz-Zippel lemma. And I'll repeat this later in the lecture when it's going to come up again. Because our interactive proofs that we're [55:47] going to design shortly are going to make use of multilinear extension polynomials, both the verifier and the prover are going to wind up having to evaluate these multilinear extensions quickly at some number of points. So we're going to require that there be efficient procedures for performing exactly that task. So here is a fact, whose proof I will sketch shortly. It is that suppose an algorithm is given as input all 2 to the l evaluations of a function f mapping 0, 1 to the l to some field. So this list of all evaluations of f is like the sort of dumb, naive way of describing f just by listing every evaluation that it has. So the fact is that for any desired point r in field to the l at which one might want to evaluate the multilinear extension of f, there's actually an algorithm that runs in time, order 2 to the l that will process this list of evaluations of f and spit out the desired evaluation of the multilinear extension f twiddle of r. So note that this runtime, order 2 to the l, is within a constant factor of optimal because 2 to the l time is required simply to read this description of f because this description of f lists all 2 to the l evaluations of f. So you really can't hope for runtime better than about 2 to the l. And this algorithm achieves that within a constant factor. So here's a sketch of how the algorithm works. It basically just follows Lagrange interpolation. So I sketch pictorially in an example how Lagrange interpolation works a few slides ago. So let me repeat that again but this time, in symbols. So for any input w in 0, 1 to the l, we can define a Lagrange basis polynomial, which is typically denoted delta tilde sub w. I mentioned we included one term for input in 0, 1 to the l which f has defined when I was pictorially describing Lagrange interpolation before. [58:06] And this multilinear polynomial maps w to 1 and all other inputs and 0, 1 to the l to 0. So then we can just express the multilinear extension of f as a weighted sum of these Lagrange basis polynomials, where the weight of the w-th Lagrange basis polynomial is just f evaluated at w. Hence, the right-hand side of the sum is a multilinear polynomial because it is a weighted sum of these multilinear polynomials, these Lagrange basis polynomials. And at every Boolean input w, it spits out exactly f of w. Hence, it must be the unique multilinear extension of f. In summary, we have given an explicit expression for f twiddle of r. That expression is the right-hand side here, this sum over 2 to the l terms, one per input w in 0, 1 to the l. You can check offline if this lecture was a little fast to confirm that this expression on the right-hand side here is indeed a multilinear polynomial that extends f. The key point is that as soon as we have expressed f total of r in this Lagrange basis form, we immediately, very naively, get an algorithm for evaluating f total of r. That doesn't quite run in the same time of order 2 to the l but is within a factor l of that. So we get an algorithm that runs in time order l times 2 to the l. OK, and the point is that there are 2 to the l terms in the sum. The algorithm is just fed, the coefficient of each term, that is, the evaluation of f at the input w, where w is in 0, 1 to the l. And then these Lagrange basis polynomials, by definition, they are product of l terms. Each term can be evaluated in constant time. And hence, each of the 2 to the l terms of the sum can be computed in time order l. So in total, that is order l times 2 to the l. Now it turns out that one can shave off that extra factor l [60:20] in the runtime by using the fact that it is not neccessary to evaluate these Lagrange basis polynomials at the desired evaluation point r independently of each other. So there's essentially a lot of terms in these products that different Lagrange basis polynomials have in common with each other, right? So for two Boolean inputs w that agree in the i-th bit, the i-th term of the product for both of their Lagrange basis polynomials is identical. So one can use the overlapping structure of the various 2 to the l Lagrange basis polynomials to evaluate all Lagrange basis polynomials at the desired evaluation point r in total time 2 to the l instead of total time l times 2 to the l. And that is ultimately enough to reduce the runtime of this algorithm from time 2 to the l down to order 2 to the l. OK, so these details are really not important. What is important is simply that if I feed an algorithm a description of a function f whose domain is 0, 1 to the l and that description consists of all 2 to the l evaluations of f, then it is possible to evaluate the multilinear extension of f at any desired point essentially as fast as one can hope, namely, order 2 to the l time, which is only a constant factor slower than what's required simply to read the description of f. OK, great. So with all of that information about multilinear extensions out of the way, we can finally discuss an interesting interactive proof. So this interactive proof is called the sum-check protocol. It dates back to seminal work from the late '80s and early '90s of Lund, Fortnow, Karloff, and Nisan. And this is an interactive proof devoted to solving the following problem. So the problem description is a little bit funny. But we'll see as soon as we get to some applications why this is a very natural way to describe the protocol. So we imagine that the verifier is given what is called oracle [62:43] access to an l-variate polynomial g over some finite field F. Oracle access means that if the verifier needs to evaluate g at some point, it can go to the Oracle-- so think of the Oracle as just like a box that the verifier can go to-- and say, hey, oracle, tell me the evaluation of g at this point. And the oracle will come back and just hand over the requested evaluation. OK, and we say if the verifier does that, we charge the verifier one oracle query. OK, so the verifier's goal is to compute the following quantity. So the verifier wants to know what is the sum of all of g's evaluations over inputs in 0, 1 to the l. So the verifier can obviously solve this problem on her own with 2 to the l oracle evaluations and then 2 to the l field additions because it can just ask the oracle for the evaluation of g at each term b1 to bl and the sum and then just sum the results. So the point of the sum-check protocol is we consider that cost to the verifier of making those 2 to the l oracle queries too high. So instead, we're going to have the verifier offload the hard work of making those oracle queries and summing the results, offload that work to the prover. And in the sum-check protocol, it turns out the verifier will only have to run in order l time to check the provers messages and then on top of that, make just a single evaluation of g, that is, make just a single query to the Oracle. So from the verifier's perspective, it's a way of reducing the hard work of computing this big sum of 2 to the l terms to the much lower amount of work of checking the prover's messages in order l time And making just a single evaluation query to the oracle. OK, so let me explain how the sum-check protocol works. All right, so at the very start of the protocol, the prover sends the claimed answer C1. The verifier, of course, doesn't trust [64:56] that the answer is correct. So it must have to check somehow by interrogating the prover that C1 is indeed the true answer so that is that C1 equals the sum of g's evaluations over all 2 to the l Boolean inputs. So the way the verifier starts interrogating the prover to perform this check is as follows. So in round 1, the prover sends a univariate polynomial s1, which is claimed to equal H1 defined as follows. So again, s1 is what the prover actually sends. And H1 is what the prover would send if the prover is honest. OK, so this H1 is the same as the true answer, except we've sort of cut off the first sum. So no longer are we summing over the first variable b1. We're only summing over the last l minus 1 variables, b2 up to bl. And we leave the first variable free. We leave it as a variable, right? So what's happening here is in the definition of H1 is we've reduced the number of terms in the sum from 2 to the l to 2 to the l minus 1. So that's one half the number of terms as in the original sum. And we have not summed over the very first variable. And by not summing over the very first variable, we are left with a univariate polynomial that we are calling H1. Note that the degree of H1 in its variable x1 is at most the degree of the multivariate polynomial g in its first variable. So this means that if g has low degree in each variable, say, it has degree at most 2 or 3 in each variable, then even though there are 2 to the l minus 1 terms in this sum, it's a very big sum. H1 will simply be a degree 2 or 3 univariate polynomial. And hence, specifying H1 can be done by just sending three or four coefficients. It's just three or four field elements. So we're taking this really enormous sum. But the result of the sum is simply a univariate polynomial of degree, say, 2 or 3. [67:16] So while the definition of H1 involves a giant sum, H1 itself is a very simple object, which can be specified with just a few field elements. OK, so the prover in round 1, again, sends the verifier a polynomial s1, which is claimed to equal H1. But of course, again, the verifier does not trust that the prover is being honest. So the verifier has to come up with a way to check actually two things. So one is, does s1 equal H1? And the other is, even if s1 does equal H1, is that consistent with the true answer being C1? OK, so let's do that second check first. So to check that if s1 actually truly equals H1, then the true answer is C1. The verifier simply does the following. It checks that C1 equals s1 to 0 plus s1 to 1. And basically, we defined H1 so that if the prover is honest throughout, this equality will hold because C1 is obtained by taking H1 and just adding back in that sum over the first variable equaling 0 and 1. So if the prover is honest throughout, then indeed, the true answer, which sums over all l variables, is obtained by taking H1 and just summing its lone variable over 0 and 1. So the verifier simply checks that C1 satisfies the relationship that it should with the polynomial s1 if the prover has been honest both about the claimed answer C1 and that s1 actually equals what it should, namely, H1. OK, so that has allowed the verifier at this point in the protocol to check that if s1 equals H1, like it should, then the true answer is C1 as claimed. But it remains to check, does s1 equal H1, as it should? OK, and the way the verifier checks that is it simply picks a random point r1 and confirms that s1 and H1 agree at r1, right? And the point is if s1 does not equal H1, they're not the same polynomial. [69:38] Then because they're both low-degree polynomials and they're not the same polynomial, as we've seen when we discuss the Schwartz-Zippel-Demillo-Lipton lemma, means that if the verifier is able to evaluate both of these polynomials at a random point in the field with overwhelming probability, they will disagree at that random point, right? And the verifier will therefore reject, right? So it's basically to check whether s1 and H1 are the same polynomial because they are low-degree, degree much lower than the size of the entire field. It's enough to just evaluate them at a single random point and confirm they agree at that point. So the verifier can, on its own, very quickly evaluate s1 at a randomly chosen point r1 because the prover explicitly sends s1 to the verifier. And if it's a degree 2 or 3 univariate polynomial, it takes only a handful of field operations, certainly, a constant number of field operations, to compute s1 of r1, where r1 is the random field element chosen by the verifier. However, evaluating H1 of r1 is much more of a problem because the verifier does not actually know H1 of r1 given that it's defined as still a very large sum over evaluations of g, OK? So the verifier cannot actually, on its own, evaluate H1 of r1. But fortunately, H1 of r1 is expressed here in a form that is exactly amenable to applying the sum-check protocol. Essentially, what the verifier now has to check in a recursive fashion is that s1 of r1, which is the value of the verifier computed on its own, equals this giant sum of g's evaluations, where the first variable now is fixed to r1. And we are summing over Boolean assignments to the last l minus 1 variables. And this is exactly the kind of statement that the sum-check protocol is designed to solve. It's just essentially, all that's changed is we've reduced the number of variables [71:54] by one by effectively binding the first variable to the field element r1, so it no longer needs to be summed over. So effectively, the prover and verifier can recursively apply the sum-check protocol to check this equality, right? And in this way, they proceed round by round through the protocol. And each round, another variable of g gets bound to a randomly chosen field element. So they just keep doing this round by round until finally in the l-th round, the final variable of g gets bound to a random value rl. And at that point, the final claim the verifier is left to check is that's sl of rl, where, again, sl is the univariate polynomial the prover sent in the l-th round, equals g evaluated at r1 to rl, OK? And at this point, there's no need for any more rounds because this is a quantity that the verifier can compute on its own with just a single query to the oracle. So the verifier goes to the oracle and says, hey, oracle, I need to know the evaluation of g at point r1 to rl. And the oracle just comes back and hands the verifier the requested evaluation. The verifier confirms that indeed, sl of rl equals that evaluation. If so, the verifier accepts. Otherwise, the verifier rejects. So that is sum-check protocol. So let me briefly sketch why it is both complete and sound. This should be obvious from the description of the protocol. But I will run through it quickly. So completeness holds by design. The protocol was designed carefully so that if the prover sends the prescribed univariate polynomial in each round, then all of the verifiers checks will pass, right? So as I explained before in round 1, if the prover truly sent the claimed-- [74:01] the correct answer C1 and the polynomial s1 that the prover sends in round 1 equals what it should, namely, H1, I explained that in that case, C1 will exactly equal s1 to 0 plus s1 to 1, right? And then similarly at every other rounds, if the prover has been honest up to that point and then moreover, sends the correct polynomial s i of x i in round i, the verifier's consistency check in round i will pass. So it's just a recursive instance of this same check here. So the protocol is carefully designed for all of the verifier's checks to pass if the prover is honest. Now in terms of soundness, the key claim is that if the prover begins with a false claim, namely, sends a claim to answer C1 that does not equal the true answer, then no matter what messages the prover sends in each around, the verifier will reject with probability at least 1 minus number of variables times the degree of the polynomial g in each variable divided by the field size. So think of the number of variables l as maybe 30 or 60. And think of the degree in each variable as 2 or 3 and the field size as, I don't know, 2 to 128th. OK, so this probability, l times d over field size, that the verifier fails to reject if the prover sent an incorrect answer at the start of the protocol is something like 60 times 3, so 180, over 2 to the 128th, right? It's a completely minuscule probability. Basically, it will never happen. Yeah, so it's' a very sound protocol as long as the field you're working over is much bigger than l times d. OK, so let's prove this soundness bound. So I guess the-- I describe the protocol in a way that suggested it sounds. But we can nonetheless run through the analysis. So one way to prove it is by induction on the number of variables l. So in the case that l equals 1, so we're just [76:27] trying to compute g of 0 plus g of 1, where g is a univariate polynomial, the sum-check protocol in that case is pretty degenerate or simple, right? The prover sends a single message, s1, which is just s1 is claimed to equal g in that case. And all the verifier does is evaluate both s1 and g at a randomly chosen point r1 and confirm that they're equal. And as far as showing that the sum-check protocol in this almost degenerate case of one variable is sound, just observe-- and I explain this as I was presenting the protocol-- that if s1 does not equal g, so if the prover was lying there, then because they are both low-degree polynomials, degree at most d, and we're evaluating them at randomly chosen field element r1 and they're not the same polynomial, the probability they agree at that randomly chosen field element is at most degree over field size. And that is exactly what the claim up here about soundness of the l-variate sum-check protocol tells you in the case l equals 1, is that the soundness error is 1 times d over field size. And that's what we just explained in the case l equals 1. OK, so that is the base case of the induction. So now let's consider the general case, l is greater than 1. So recall that the prover's first message, s1, in the first round of the protocol is claimed to equal H1, where H1 is this big sum of g's evaluations where we're summing over all variables except the first one. OK, and what the verifier does is it picks a random r1. And they recursively invoke the sum-check protocol to confirm that's s1 of r1 equals H1 of r1. OK, so the point is that if s1 does not equal H1, that is, they're different polynomials, then again, by the same reasoning as before, with overwhelming probability [78:29] when the verifier picks a random field element r1 to evaluate both polynomials at, they will disagree at that evaluation. So put another way, the probability that they do agree at that randomly chosen evaluation is at most d over field size, where again, d is the degree of s1 and H1. And so what one does in the soundness analysis is just condition on this event that s1 equals H1 at r1 not occurring because the event does occur with such tiny probability. We can basically just assume it never occurs. And in the event that it doesn't occur, so in the event that s1 of r1 does not equal H1 of r1, the prover is left to prove a false claim in the recursive call to the sum-check protocol. Remember, the recursive call applies the sum-check protocol to the l minus 1-variate polynomial obtained by fixing the first variable to g to r1. And because it's an l minus 1-variate polynomial, we can apply the induction hypothesis to conclude that the prover convinces the verifier in the recursive call to accept this false claim with probability at most degree times l minus 1 over field size. OK, so in summary, if the prover in the first round sends a univariate polynomial s1 that does not equal the prescribed polynomial H1, then the probability of the verifier accepts is at most-- well, the probability that the prover winds up with a lucky choice of r1 in the first round and despite s1 not being the same polynomial as H1-- they happen to agree at r1. So that probability is at most d over field size. Plus, the probability that the verifier accepts conditioned on this first event not happening-- and we've explained that probability by the inductive hypothesis is at most d times l minus 1 over field size. So you sum these two probabilities up. And you get exactly the claim soundness [80:44] error of degree times number of variables over field size. So to summarize, the sum-check protocol is a complete and sound protocol that allows the verifier to force the prover to correctly sum up all evaluations of an l-variate polynomial g over some finite field where the sum is over not all field elements but all vectors 0, 1 to the l. So there are 2 to the l terms of that sum. OK, now there is one round of the sum-check protocol for each of the l variables of the polynomial being summed. And in each round, the prover sends a univariate polynomial of degree at most d, where d is the degree of g in that variable. Again, think of d as 2 or 3 because that's what it'll be in most applications and l as, I don't know, 30 or 60 or something. So the total communication across all l rounds of the protocol then is order d times l, which, if d is a constant like 2 or 3, is really like order l. The verifier's runtime is linear in the total communication size. So it's order d times l. Plus, the verifier does have to evaluate g at a single randomly chosen point at the end of the protocol. OK, the prover's time-- and I'm not going to go into great detail about this-- is pretty close to what would be required just to solve the problem. So that is it turns out to be possible to implement the prover in time order d times 2 to the l times the time required to evaluate G at any point. And this is the amount of time required simply to compute the right answer, at least if the prover is also given access to the polynomial via some oracle because the whole point of the problem is to sum up g's evaluations at 2 to the l points. So it's not really possible to do that, at least in this setting, where the prover can only get those evaluations via queries to the oracle. [83:04] The prover definitely has to ask 2 to the l queries to the oracle, which is captured in this runtime here. And then if d is a constant, then asymptotically speaking, that doesn't actually increase the runtime. So yeah, essentially up to a constant factor, we know how to implement the prover as fast as possible in this sum-check protocol. OK, so that is sum-check protocol. This problem of summing up all evaluations of some l-variate polynomial g over inputs in 0, 1 to the l might seem like a really strange problem, like, why would anybody want to do that? And we are now going to see a couple examples exactly why someone would want to do that. So I'm going to start with an interactive proof for counting triangles in a graph. And the reason I'm presenting this is just to give a very simple and clean problem application for which the sum-check protocol is really useful. So it's not that I think counting triangles and graphs is such an important fundamental problem in its own right, although people do care about it. It's that it's just a really clean application of the sum-check protocol. So yeah, in the counting triangles problem, the input to the problem is a matrix, an n by n matrix, which we think of as representing the adjacency matrix of a graph. OK, so here, a graph is a collection of n vertices. And any two vertices in the graph may or may not be connected by an edge. OK, so a graph is just a collection of vertices-- think of them as dots-- and edges connecting vertices. And the adjacency matrix of a graph has a row for each vertex and a column for each vertex. And the i j-th entry of that adjacency matrix is 1 if and only if vertex i of the graph is connected to vertex j of the graph. [85:08] So for those who haven't seen graphs before, you can imagine-- you can think of the Facebook graph in which there is a vertex for every person on Facebook. And two vertices of the graph are connected by an edge if and only if those two Facebook profiles are friends with each other. So that's what a graph is. And yeah, the input to the counting triangles problem is the adjacency matrix of that graph. And the desired output is the number of triangles in the graph. So in the Facebook context, that would be the number of triples of people, so the number of people Alice, Bob, and Charlie that are all friends with each other. So Alice is friends with Bob. Bob is friends with Charlie. And Charlie is friends with Alice. That is the number of triangles in the Facebook graph. So another way to express that in terms of the adjacency matrix is the goal is to compute the sum over all triples of vertices i, j, k of Aij times Ajk times Aik because this product is 1 if and only if vertices i and j are connected because that ensures that Aij is 1. Otherwise, it's 0. We also are requiring here that vertices j and k are connected because if not, Ajk will be 0. And that will kill that term of the sum. And similarly, the term Aik essentially requires that i and k are connected by an edge because otherwise, Aik is 0, ensuring that this whole product is 0. And therefore, the corresponding term of the sum would be 0. So here, we are summing up all triples of vertices such that all three vertices are connected to each other by an edge so that is every pair of vertices in the triple is connected by an edge. So the fastest known algorithm for this problem runs in what's called matrix multiplication time. [87:08] So that is currently known to be time about n to the 2.37th. So that is super linear time in the size of the input matrix. The input matrix has size n squared. And the fastest known algorithm for the problem takes time noticeably higher than n squared. So I am going to give an interactive proof for the problem in which the verifier in the interactive proof runs in time n squared, which is essentially the best you can hope for up to a constant factor because even reading the input takes time n squared. And note this is a useful protocol for the verifier because by running an n squared time, the verifier is saving work compared to just ignoring the prover and solving the problem on her own. OK, so let me tell you how the protocol works. So the main conceptual leap in the protocol is to view the matrix A that is input to the verifier to both the verifier and the prover, not as an n by n matrix, but rather as a function whose domain is 0, 1 to the 2 log n. So that's a funny way to view a matrix. But essentially, all we're doing here is viewing the matrix itself as a list of all evaluations of some function. OK, so pictorially, this is what this interpretation of the matrix looks like. So here, we have a 4 by 4 matrix whose entries are field elements, right? In the counting triangles problem, I said the entries of the matrix would be 0, 1. But everything essentially works even if the entries of the matrix are general field elements. You can think of that as adjacency matrix of a weighted graph. Anyway, so this is just depicting how one can take any matrix, whether it has 0, 1 entries or just general field elements as its entries, and interpret it not as a 4 by 4 matrix, but rather as a function on four bits, so on 0, 1 squared by 0, [89:17] 1 squared. So all we do to repeat is we interpret the matrix as simply listing all evaluations of the function. So A 0, 0, 0, 0 is going to be 1. A 0, 0, 0, 1 is going to be 3. A 0, 0, 1, 0 is going to be 5 and so forth. So again, we interpret the entries of the matrix as just providing a list of all evaluations of some function whose domain is 0, 1 to the l for the appropriate value of l. That value of l turns out to be 2 times log n because the number of vectors in 0, 1 to the 2 times log n is exactly n squared. So hopefully, that makes sense. This is really the main conceptual leap in the protocol. We simply need to interpret the input matrix not as an n by n matrix, but rather, as a function mapping 0, 1 to the 2 log n to the field. And the reason we're doing that is because once we interpret the matrix as such a function, it makes sense to refer to the multilinear extension polynomial of that function. So again, we're going to view A not as a matrix, but rather, as a function whose domain is 0, 1 to the 2 log n. Recall that any function with that domain has a unique multilinear extension polynomial, which we're going to denote by a twiddle. And then we're going to define a derived polynomial that takes actually 3 log n variables as input, whereas a twiddle only takes 2 log n variables as input. And this 3 log n variate polynomial, we define as follows. So it is a product of three copies of a twiddle, where the first copy of a twiddle is fed the first 2 log n variables of this polynomial g we're defining. The second copy of a twiddle is fed the second 2 log n variables of g. And the third copy of a twiddle is fed the first log n variables of g and the last log n variables of g. And we have specifically defined this polynomial [91:45] so that it is a polynomial extension of this thing being summed. OK, so if you feed into this polynomial Boolean labels, so say-- remember, we are associating rows and columns of the matrix not with integers between 1 and n anymore, but rather, with bit vectors of length log n. OK, so if you feed into g bit vectors-- three bit vectors of length log n, so, say, those bit vectors index three nodes, i, j, and k, this will simply spit out Aij times Ajk times Aik, which means that computing this sum of entries of A producted together is equivalent to summing up g's evaluations over inputs in 0, 1 to the 3 log n. And that is exactly the thing that the sum-check protocol is designed to do. In summary, the prover and verifier simply apply the sum-check protocol to this polynomial g. And that's it. Now what are the costs of the protocol? So remember, the sum-check protocol has one round per variable of the polynomial g whose evaluations are being summed. And this polynomial g has 3 log n variables. And it has degree 2 in each variable, right? So just to be clear here, x, y, and z each consist of log n variables. But a twiddle has degree 1 in each of its variable. So A twiddle of x comma y is multilinear. But when I multiply that by A twiddle y comma z, that product is no longer multilinear because y appears in both copies of a twiddle, right? So this product has degree 2 in each of the 3 log n variables, while A twiddle itself has degree 1 in each of its variables. So yeah, the sum-check protocol applied to g, there's 3 log n rounds. And in each round, the prover sends a degree 2 polynomial. So the total communication is something like 9 log n field elements, I think? [94:19] 3 log n rounds with three field elements sent in each round, one per coefficient of the degree 2 polynomial. There are three coefficients of a degree 2 polynomial. The verifier processes all of those messages in logarithmic time. And then at the end of the protocol, the verifier has to evaluate g at a random point. And that is the dominant cost in the verifiers runtime. And the point is evaluating g at one point or 1 or 2 or 3 amounts to evaluating A twiddle at three points, one of the points being r1, r2, the other point being r2, r3, and the third point being r1, r3. And as I explained in the fact at the end of my introduction of multilinear extensions, given the list of all evaluations of the function being extended by A twiddle, the verifier can, in linear time, evaluate that multilinear extension at any desired point, which means that each of these three evaluations of A twiddle can be computed directly by the verifier in time linear in the size of the input matrix. And that is why the verifier's runtime is order n squared, because it's spending only logarithmic time processing the prover's messages and checking them for consistency. And then it's spending order n squared time, which is linear in the size of its input, evaluating A twiddle at each of the three points that it has to evaluate A twiddle at to check the prover's messages. And that is how you use the sum-check protocol to solve the counting triangles problem in a way in which the verifier runs up to a constant factor as fast as we can hope. OK, so with that out of the way, now that we know how the subject protocol works and we've seen how to apply it to a problem people actually care about, we can finally get to the highlight of the lecture, which [96:11] is the SNARK for circuit satisfiability derived from the sum-check protocol. OK, so let's recall what is a SNARK for circuit satisfiability. So the prover and verifier have agreed upon an arithmetic circuit C over some field F. Let's let S refer to the size of the circuit. So that is the number of gates in the circuit. And let's let y denote the claimed output of the circuit. So the prover in the SNARK is claiming to know a witness w that causes the circuit to output y. So for simplicity, we're going to take the public input x to be the empty input. That's just because I don't want to have to write x everywhere in the next 10 slides or so. So what that means is the prover is really just claiming to know what w such that evaluating C on w equals y. That is what the SNARK prover is claiming. And I guess as a reminder, in an arithmetic circuit, the inputs to the circuit are elements of the finite field F. And the gates of the circuit compute addition and multiplication over that field. And so the output of the circuit is simply one or more field elements. OK, so yeah, this example circuit simply takes each input, squares it, and then sums the results. That's an arithmetic circuit over any field. All right, so the SNARK relies on the notion of a transcript for the circuit satisfiability instance. So a transcript T for a circuit C is simply an assignment of a value to every gate in the circuit. And the transcript is said to be correct if it assigns the gates, the values obtained, by evaluating the circuit on a valid input w. OK, so yeah, that's a lot to absorb in a sentence. But I have a picture here that should make it a little bit more concrete and simpler. So imagine that the prover is claiming to know a witness w such that evaluating the circuit on w [98:17] causes the circuit to output the value 5. OK, so here, I have depicted a correct transcript for that claim. So the witness here is 1, 0, 2, 0. And going gate by gate through the circuit, the gates have the following values, right? So this first gate here on the left computes the square of the first input. So that's 1 squared. So that gate winds up getting assigned value 1 in the correct transcript, right? The second gate squares the second input. So that 0 squared, that gets value 0. The third gate computes 2 squared. So that gets value 4. And the fourth gate here computes 0 squared because the fourth input is 0. So that gate gets value 0. So similarly, this gate here sums up these two multiplication gates. So that's 1 plus 0. So it gets value 1. This gate sums up the two multiplication gates feeding into it. So that's 4 plus 0. So it gets value 4. And then finally, the output gate sums up its two inputs. So that's 1 plus 4, or 5. So this is a correct transcript for the claim that the prover knows a witness w such that C of w equals 5. We just went gate by gate through the circuit, evaluating the circuit on the witness, and assigned each gate the value that the gate computes when you evaluate the circuit on that particular input. OK, so as suggested by the counting triangles protocol, we are not going to want to view these transcripts as transcripts. [CHUCKLES] We're really going to want to view them as functions whose domain is 0, 1 to the l for the appropriate number of variables l. [100:04] And because the transcript has length S, where, again, S is the number of gates in the circuit, the appropriate value of l here, in order to interpret the transcript as all evaluations of a function on 0, 1 to the l, is precisely log base 2 of S because the number of vectors in 0, 1 to the log base 2 of S exactly S, right? It's 2 to the log base 2 of S, which is S. OK, so what we're going to do is assign each gate in the circuit a log base 2 of S-bit label. And we're going to view the transcript that the prover is claiming to know as a function mapping gate labels to the field. So I have taken this circuit. I have provided a correct transcript for the circuit under the claim that the prover knows a witness that causes it to output the value for. And then here on the right, I have interpreted that transcript as a function whose domain is 0, 1 to the log S. For this example, I believe is 16, which means the domain of this function that we're interpreting the transcript as is 0, 1 to the 4 because there are 16-bit vectors of length 4, right? And we're doing this in the natural way, same as in the counting triangles problem. So we are simply interpreting the first entry of the transcript as the function's evaluation at input 0, 0, 0, 0, the second entry of the transcript as the function's evaluation at input 0, 0, 0, 1, and so on and so forth. The last entry of the transcript, namely, four, we are interpreting as the function's evaluation at input 1, 1, 1, 1. All right, so at this point, now that we've interpreted the transcript as a function over domain 0, 1 to the log S, the prover is effectively claiming to know a function that corresponds to a correct transcript. So we are going to use a polynomial IOP based on the sum-check protocol to allow the verifier to confirm that indeed, the prover has in its head [102:12] a correct transcript, which, again, we are interpreting as a function over domain 0, 1 to the log S. So this term polynomial IOP was used in Dan's lecture. It is simply an interactive proof where one or more messages from the prover may actually specify a large polynomial that the verifier of the polynomial IOP will not actually read in full but rather, merely evaluate at, say, a single point. So please refer to Dan's lecture, lecture 2, for more details of that, of what is a polynomial IOP. But the following protocol should be fairly clear even without referring back to Dan's lecture. OK, so here is the start of the polynomial IOP. Again, the prover is claiming to have in its head a correct transcript T for the prover's claim. And we are viewing T as a function mapping gate labels to the field, where each gate label consists of log base 2 of S bits. Now the prover's first message in the polynomial IOP is claimed to simply be an extension polynomial of the correct transcript, which, remember, means that the extension polynomial h should satisfy the property that if you feed into h a Boolean input that is an input in 0, 1 to the log S, it spits out the same thing that the transcript spits out at that input, OK? Remember, the transcript is only defined over these Boolean inputs, that is, inputs in 0, 1 to log S. The polynomial extension of it is defined over field to the log S. But extension means that if you evaluate the polynomial at some input x where the transcript is defined, it spits out the same thing as the transcript. So the verifier needs to check that indeed, this polynomial h that the prover sent extends a correct transcript. But it is very difficult for the verifier to check that, at least on its own, because the verifier in a polynomial IOP [104:23] is only able to evaluate the polynomial that the prover sent, namely, h, at, say, a handful of evaluation points, while the requirement that h extend a correct transcript involves S many evaluations of h, one for every input at which the transcript is defined. That is once for every input x in 0, 1 to the log S. So we need to design some kind of clever protocol that enables the verifier to confirm that h of x equals T of x for all x in 0, 1 to log S for some correct transcript T, despite the fact that the verifier is ultimately only going to be able to evaluate h at a handful of points rather than S many points. So going back to some intuition, which I already described, but it's worth bringing up again, why is this polynomial extension h of a correct transcript a useful object for the prover to send, even though the verifier is only allowed to valuate h at a handful of points. You should think of H as a distance amplified encoding of the correct transcript T. So remember, the domain of T is only 0, 1 to the log S, which is a domain of size S. But the domain of the polynomial extension h is field to the log S, which is vastly bigger, especially if your field C is size 2 to the 128th or something. And remember, if any two transcripts disagree in even a single input, their extension polynomials disagree at almost all inputs in field to the log S. So somehow even tiny differences in transcripts get blown up by the extension polynomials into easily detectable differences, differences in particular that are detectable even by a verifier that is only allowed to evaluate those extension polynomials at, say, a single point or a handful of points. So the distance amplifying nature of these extension polynomials will allow the verifier to detect even a single inconsistency [106:35] in the entire transcript. That's the intuition. OK, so back to the polynomial IOP-- so again, the prover's first message in the polynomial IOP is a polynomial h, which is claimed to extend a correct transcript T, where we are viewing the transcript as a function with domain 0, 1 to log S. The verifier needs to check that h indeed extends some correct transcript but is only able to learn a few evaluations of h. So this is what we do. We take a two-step plan of attack. The first step in the plan of attack is to transform h into a related polynomial, which I'm going to call g sub h. g sub h has three times as many variables as h itself, OK? So while h itself has log S variables, g sub h has 3 log S variables. And we're going to require two properties out of g sub h. So the first is that h extending a correct transcript will have to be equivalent to g sub h vanishing over the Boolean hypercube. That is a pithy way of saying that if you feed into g sub h any Boolean value, that is, any triple a, b, c, with each of a, b, c being a gate label, namely, being in 0, 1 to log S, g sub h should spit out 0, So again, this if and only if means h extends a correct transcript if and only if g sub h vanishes for all Boolean vectors a, b, c. So if h is not a correct transcript, there should be at least one triple a, b, c such that g sub h evaluated at that triple does not equal 0. OK, so that's the first property we require g sub h. And the second property is that evaluating g sub h at any input r. In order to do that, it is enough to evaluate h itself at only three inputs. So I will sketch the definition of g sub h shortly. And you'll see that these two properties fall right out [108:42] of the definition. But one way to think about what we're accomplishing by identifying this g sub h with these nice two properties is the following. So the original claim that the prover makes is that h extends a correct transcript. And that is some complicated claim about h's values at all inputs in 0, 1 to the log S. So if a is an addition gate, then that condition is requiring that h of a indeed equals the sum of the values that h assigns to the two [? n ?] neighbors of a. So it's a very complicated set of constraints about the values that h takes at the Boolean inputs. And this g sub h, in contrast, what we're going to require from g sub h is some very simple structured claim, namely, that it equals 0 at every single Boolean input, right? So again, the original claim that h extends a correct transcript is complicated. For every gate, we need to look at the n neighbors of the gate and confirm that the value assigned to the gate is consistent with the values assigned to its n neighbors. It's very complicated. g sub h, we're merely going to require that it spits out 0 whenever you feed into it a Boolean vector. That's it. This other nice property of g sub h, besides it being kind of a very nice structured claim about its behavior over the Boolean hypercube, is that every time the verifier wants to evaluate g sub h at a random point, it only needs to evaluate h at a handful of points. So query access to g sub h evaluations is more or less equivalent up to a factor 3 to query access to h itself. That is the prover's first message polynomial. OK, so that's the first step in the two-step plan of attack. The second step is to design an interactive proof to indeed check that g sub h vanishes over the Boolean hypercube. [110:54] And in this interactive proof, we're going to require that V only needs to evaluate g sub h at a random point r. All right, so let's start with step 1 of the plan. Here, I'm going to be a little bit sketchy, but I hope I'll convey the main idea. So again, step 1 requires us to take any polynomial h and identify a related polynomial g sub h in three times as many variables such that h extends a correct transcript if and only if g sub h vanishes over the balloon hypercube. And moreover, evaluating g sub h at any point entails evaluating h at most three points. OK, so roughly speaking, this is a little bit of a simplification. So here it is. So the definition does unfortunately introduce two new functions that I haven't previously mentioned, which are denoted add twiddle of a, b, c and mult twiddle of a, b, c. So let me tell you what these functions are. So these are multilinear extensions of what I call the wiring predicates of the circuit. So the function add, of which add twiddle is the multilinear extension, simply takes as input three Boolean gate labels. So a, b, and c are each Boolean vectors in 0, 1 to the log S that we feed into add. And add spits out 1 if and only if a is an addition gate and its two n neighbors are b and c. Otherwise, add spits out 0. So that is add of a, b, and c, spits out 1 if gate a should be assigned the value that is the sum of the values assigned to gates b and c. Similarly, mult spits out 1 if and only if a is a multiplication gate and its n neighbors are b and c. Another way of saying that is that mult spits out 1 if a should be assigned the product of the values assigned to gates b and c. [112:52] And otherwise, mult spits out 0. OK, so it's pretty easy then to check what's going on with this definition. So there are only three cases to consider as we think about how this polynomial g sub h behaves at Boolean inputs a, b, c. So if a is the label of a gate that computes the sum of gates b and c, then add twiddle a, b, c will spit out 1. And h of a minus h of b plus h of c, in that case, will spit out 0 if and only if h does assign a the sum of the values that h assigns to gates b and c. So essentially, this term, add twiddle a, b, c times h of a minus h of b plus h of c, ensures that for each addition gate in the circuit, the value assigned to that addition gate is the sum of the values assigned to its n neighbors in the sense that if that does hold, then this term spits out 0. And if that does not hold, then this term spits out something nonzero. Similarly, this term involving mult twiddle ensures that for every multiplication gate in the circuit, the value assigned to that multiplication gate is the product of the two values assigned to its n neighbors in the sense that this term involving mult twiddle spits out 0 if indeed, the value h assigns to a is the product of h of b and h of c. And otherwise, it spits out something non-zero. Meanwhile, for any triple a, b, c whereby a is neither the sum nor the product of gates b and c because b and c are not the n neighbors of a, then both add twiddle a, b, c and mult twiddle a, b c evaluate to 0. And hence, the entire expression for g sub h at that input a, b, c evaluates to 0. So in summary, this definition of g sub h ensures that it evaluates to 0 for all triples of inputs a, b, c in 0, 1 to the log S if and only if the value assigned to each gate respects the operation of that gate in the sense [115:20] that addition gates are assigned a value by h that equals the sum of the values that h assigned to the n neighbors of that gate. And multiplication gates a are assigned a value equal to the product of the values assigned to the n neighbors of a. We also require the property that evaluating g sub h at any point r, it suffices to evaluate h at only three inputs. To evaluate h at a point, say, r1, r2, r3, where each of r1, r2, r3 is in field to the log S, it suffices to evaluate h at points r1, r2, and r3. And the verifier also does have to evaluate add twiddle and mult twiddle at the point r1, r2, r3. It turns out that for structured circuits, this can be done by the verifier in time logarithmic in the circuit size. And even for unstructured circuits, there are other things you can do to ensure that the verifier can quickly obtain these evaluations of add twiddle and mult twiddle, note in particular that add twiddle and mult twiddle depend only on the wiring pattern of the circuit and not on the actual circuit transcript. Hence, the polynomials add twiddle and mult twiddle can be, for example, committed using a polynomial commitment scheme in preprocessing. And that enables the verifier to outsource the hard work of evaluating add twiddle and mult twiddle at the point r1, r2, r3 to the prover. And the prover merely needs to provide an evaluation proof that the provided requested evaluation of add twiddle and mult twiddle is consistent with the preprocessing commitment. As a reminder, step 1 of the plan, identify this polynomial g sub h such that h extends a correct transcript if and only if g sub h vanishes over the Boolean hypercube. Yet it remains for the verifier to check that indeed, g sub h vanishes over the Boolean hypercube. [117:23] So before I tell you how we do that, I want you to just imagine for a moment that g sub h were a univariate polynomial rather than a 3 log S-variate polynomial, OK? And moreover, imagine that rather than needing to check that g sub h vanishes over 0, 1 the 3 log S, which doesn't even make sense if g sub h is a univariate polynomial rather than a 3 log S-variate polynomial, we instead needed to check that g sub h vanishes over some subset capital H of the finite field. So in this case, we could exploit the following fact to allow the prover to prove to the verifier that indeed, g sub h vanishes over the set capital H. The fact states that g sub h indeed vanishes over the set capital H if and only if g sub h is divisible by what is called the "vanishing polynomial" for capital H. This is the lowest degree polynomial that evaluates to 0 over all points in h. So this is a polynomial that essentially is defined to evaluate to 0 over all points in h and to not evaluate to 0 over any other points in the field. So this is called the vanishing polynomial for capital H. And yeah, it's not too hard to prove this fact. One direction is easy. That is if g sub h is divisible by this vanishing polynomial, then clearly, g sub h does indeed vanish over all inputs in h because it is a product of something that does vanish over all inputs in h-- by definition, the vanishing polynomial for h and some quotient. OK, so here would be the polynomial IOP to establish that a univariate polynomial g sub h vanishes over some subset capital H of the finite field. So the prover could send a polynomial q, the quotient polynomial, such that g sub h equals q times Z sub capital H. Again, the existence of that quotient polynomial is equivalent by the fact above, to g sub h vanishing over the set capital h. Now after the prover sends this polynomial q, [119:38] the verifier could check that indeed, g sub h equals q times Z sub capital H by evaluating both the left-hand side and right-hand side of that equality at a random point r and just checking that the two polynomials agree at that point. And as usual, the reason this suffices is because if g sub h does not equal q times Z sub H, the probability that they agree at a randomly chosen point r is at most the degree of these polynomials over the size of the field. And if the field is sufficiently large, that is a negligible probability. OK, so unfortunately, this slide doesn't work. And even if it did work, there would be efficiency reasons not to take this approach. So it doesn't work because, of course, g sub h is not univariate. It is 3 log S-variate. Even if g sub h were univariate, it would be somewhat expensive to apply the quotient polynomial approach of the previous slide because computing that quotient polynomial requires dividing fairly high degree polynomials. Their degree isn't so high that it affects the soundness error too much. But it is high enough that dividing g sub h by the vanishing polynomial for capital H would be expensive. It would require a large fast Fourier transform. And also in the final SNARK, this would mean applying the polynomial commitment scheme to additional polynomials because the prover is sending the quotient polynomial q, which ultimately means in the final SNARK, committing to that polynomial q and then revealing requested evaluations of that polynomial q. Nonetheless, this is what very popular SNARKs such as Marlin, PlonK, and Groth16 do. And indeed, in the next lecture, Dan [121:23] is going to tell us about how PlonK works. And you'll see that the prover in PlonK sends commitments to a quotient polynomial exactly as I described on the previous slide. So the solution I want to tell you about today that is based on interactive proofs instead uses the sum-check protocol to confirm that g sub h vanishes over the Boolean hypercube. And this both is capable of handling the fact that g sub h has 3 log S variables instead of one variable and also has efficiency benefits. For example, the prover does not have to send this large quotient polynomial that in the resulting SNARK would entail committing to that large quotient polynomial. OK, so let me just briefly recall that the sum-check protocol allows the verifier to force the prover to sum up all evaluations of an l-variate polynomial g over all inputs in 0, 1 to the l. The proof length is roughly the total degree of g. More precisely, it is l times the maximum degree of g in each variable. There is one round of the sum-check protocol for each of the l variables. And the verifier time tends to be dominated by the time required to evaluate g at a single randomly chosen input. It's also worth pointing out that to apply the sum-check protocol to a polynomial g, the verifier doesn't even know what g is, as long as it has some way of getting a random evaluation of g because in the sum-check protocol, the only information the verifier ever needs to know about g at any point is simply to obtain one evaluation of g at a randomly chosen point r at the very end of the protocol. OK, so how do we finally check that g sub h vanishes at all inputs in 0, 1 to the 3 log S, with the verifier only evaluating [123:17] g sub h at a single point? OK, I'm going to tell you the general idea. And if I have time, I will add a slide that actually fills in the full details. The general idea will work over the integers instead of a finite field. So this is not really a full solution because ultimately, SNARKs do have to work over the finite field. If they worked over the integers, the integers that would arise in the protocol would be so large that specifying them would drastically blow up the proof size. So we cannot actually work over the integers. But life is just a little bit simpler if we did. So on this slide, I will tell you a solution that works over the integers. OK, so in order to check that g sub h evaluates to 0 at all inputs and 0, 1 to the 3 log S, if g sub h were defined over the integers rather than a finite field, it would be enough for the verifier to compute the sum of the squared evaluations of g sub h over all inputs in 0, 1 to the 3 log S. So the point is here, that this sum is 0 if and only if g sub h does indeed vanish over inputs in 0, 1 to the 3 log S. So clearly, if it vanishes, every term in the sum is 0. And if you sum up 0 squared a whole bunch of times, you get out 0. Whereas if even a single term of the sum is non-zero, well, once you square it, if you're working over the integers, it's strictly positive. And once you sum up a bunch of non-negative integers, at least one of which is strictly positive, you get out something that is non-zero. So it is enough for the verifier to sum up the squared evaluations of g sub h over the Boolean hypercube and confirm that the sum is 0. So that is all we do. And at the end of the sum-check protocol, [125:05] the verifier needs to evaluate g sub h at a single randomly chosen point. As explained previously, to do so, it suffices to evaluate the committed polynomial h, claim to extend the correct transcript at three points. Other than those evaluations, the verifier just runs in time logarithmic in the circuit size because that is the number of variables of g sub h, is 3 log S. And g sub h has degree-- I think it's 2 in each variable. And we're squaring it, so we're applying the sum-check protocol to a polynomial with degree 4 in each variable. Moreover, it's known that the prover can compute all of the messages that it has to in this sum-check protocol in order S field operations if it knows a witness for the claim that it's making. And this is optimal up to a constant factor in the sense that it takes S field operations simply to evaluate the circuit gate by gate on the witness w even if there was no proof of correctness. Now exactly in the resulting SNARK, how expensive it is to evaluate h at these three points is going to be determined by how expensive is it to compute evaluation proofs for the polynomial commitment scheme. So in practice, for the resulting SNARK, the prover's runtime tends to be dominated by the cost of the polynomial commitment scheme applied to the extension of the correct transcript h because that tends to be more expensive than the order S field operations that the prover has to do to compute its messages in the sum-check protocol applied to g sub h squared. OK, that is the end of the lecture. Thank you very much.