[00:01] YUPENG ZHANG: Hello, everyone. Welcome back to our MOOC on zero knowledge proofs. I'm Yupeng Zhang, and today I'm going to talk about SNARKs based on linear PCPs. So first, I want to remind everyone about SNARKs we've learned so far in this table. In lecture six, I introduced this, a classical protocol of the KZG polynomial commitments based on bilinear pairing. Combining it with the plonk IOP in lecture five or the interactive proofs in lecture four, we end up with SNARKs with a trusted setup. And these constructions tend to have a small proof size in practice. And in order to remove this trusted setup, I've talked about schemes based on discrete logarithm. And those include bulletproofs, Dory, Dark and Hyrax. And we also have SNARK implementations based on these polynomial commitments, such as Halo2. During the past two lectures, we also introduced the schemes building SNARKs based on error correcting codes. In lecture seven, we talk about schemes based on linear time encoder code and the Merkle hash trees, and those include Brakedown and Orion. And the last lecture, Justin talked about this interesting line of research, building scheme SNARKs based on Reed-Solomon code, and the FRI interactive Oracle proof schemes. And these schemes can actually further reduce the proof size from a square root to polylogarithm, and they include Stark, Aurora, Fractal, Virgo, and so on. The goal of this lecture is to talk about another technique to build SNARKs based on the so-called linear PCP. And this technique was actually proposed before those polynomial commitments and polynomial IOPS, and has been used to construct the earliest implementations of SNARKs. So it's worth to spend this lecture to study the detail of the constructions. [02:02] So to briefly show you the properties of these constructions, on the positive side, these SNARKs tend to have very short proof size in practice. For example, in this construction proposed by Groth in 2016, the proof only consists of three group elements. And in practice, there's only about 100 to 200 bytes. So that's actually the shortest proof size among all the SNARKs we are learning in this course. And for a similar reason, these SNARKs also have very fast verifier time. Again in this construction of Groth 16, the verifier only needs to check one parent equation using three bilinear pairings. And in practice, it only takes less than 1 millisecond to do it. And in terms of disadvantages, the poorer time of the SNARKs tend to be relatively slow in practice because they require both FFT and group exponentiations. The size of these computations are linear in the size of the circuit to prove. And because of that, they're usually slower compared to schemes based on, for example error recurrent codes. Another major drawback of these constructions is that they require a circuit specific trusted setup. So there has to be a preprocessor to perform a trusted setup with the trapdoor, and delete this trapdoor completely after the setup phase. And these schemes have to do this trusted setup for every computation you want to prove. And this may not be desirable for some applications in practice, and because of that, this is sometimes called a preprocessing SNARKs in the literature. And this is different from the SNARKs we've seen so far. For example, the plonk system that requires a one time universal trusted set up, and also other schemes without trusted setup at all. So before going into the detailed construction [04:05] of these SNARKs based on linear PCP, I want to briefly introduce the history of this line of research. So in the early days, the original construction of SNARKs was proposed in these two seminal papers by Kilian and Micali. And in these two papers, they combine the classical protocol of the probabilistically checkable proofs, PCP, with Merkle trees. And the constructions of SNARKs are actually asymptotically optimal polylogarithm vectors. They do not require any trusted set up, and they have succinct proofs and verifier time. So in theory, they are actually very good. And also in this paper by Micali in 2000, he actually applied the Shamir transformation to remove the interactions in this construction and get a non-interactive argument of knowledge. But unfortunately, they don't lead to efficient SNARK systems in practice, partly because of the heavy mechanism of the PCP. And to the best of my knowledge, I'm not aware of any concrete efficient systems implemented based on this PCP plus Merkle tree. So motivated by this problem, there is this line of research constructing SNARKs without the classical PCP algorithm. And this line of research was started by Ishai, Kushilevitz, Ostrovsky in 2007, and in this paper, they propose this concept of a linear PCP. And they build a scheme combining this one with the homomorphic encryption to get a SNARK with short proofs. But unfortunately, the prover time is quadratic in the size of the computation. And later, Jens Groth proposed the construction of SNARKs based on bilinear pairing in this paper in 2010. Although it's not directly built on top of the construction of the linear PCP, it can still be classified as a linear PCP in this model. And in this construction, it applies the bilinear pairing, [06:15] which is kind of an ancestor of the SNARKs I'm going to talk about today. But unfortunately, the site of the global parameters and the prover time are still quadratic in this constructing Groth 10. And later, the scheme was further improved by Helger Lippmaa in 2012 where the technique called progression free sets. With this technique, he improved the size of the global parameters from quadratic to quasi linear. But still, the scheme has a quadratic prover time, and does not have an efficient implementation in practice. And finally, a big breakthrough in this line of research was actually proposed in this paper by Gennaro, Gentry, Parno, and Raykova. And there, they propose this very beautiful construction of a quadratic span programs and quadratic arithmetic programs that reduces the prover time and the size of the global parameters from quadratic to quasi linear and linear in practice. And that leads to efficient instantiations and many systems in practice. And this is the one we are going to talk about today, the QAP. And after that, this line of research has led to many new techniques and efficient constructions of SNARKs. And they were usually before the invention of these polynomial IOPS and polynomial commitments, we've talked before. And here, I'm just listing a very small subset of papers, and there are many more papers with both theoretical contributions and concrete efficient systems for different applications. And there's a very long literature building a SNARKs based on linear PCP and QAPs. And in this short list, there are several papers I want to highlight. For example, this one by Parno, Gentry, Harwell, and Rico, where they propose this system called Pinocchio. That is one of the earliest efficient constructions [08:13] of SNARKs, and is the one that I'm going to talk about today. And here, we have a SNARKs for run based computations, such as the SNARKs for C, and tiny run. And we also have the recursive SNARKs of cycles of elliptic curves in this paper by Ben-Sasson et al. And we also have this famous construction for Groth 16 with the smallest proof size of only three elements. And it has been widely used in practice for different applications. And another line of research is build this SNARKs based on the original linear PCP construction. And in these two papers by SETI et al., they have the SNARK systems called Ginger and Pepper. And that was also one of the earliest systems of SNARKs. And also in this paper by Bitansky, Ishai, Ostrovsky, and Paneth, they actually unifies this line of research and they're the framework of linear interactive proofs. And instantiate, and these QAPs, and linear PCPs are actually instantiations in this framework. So that's a brief introduction of the history of this line of research on linear PCPs and QAPs. So in order to understand the construction of this SNARKs based on linear PCPs, I'm going to follow this common paradigm for building efficient SNARKs again. So recall that in order to build a SNARK for general circuits, we really have an information theoretically secure component, and this time, it's going to be this linear PCP, or quadratic arithmetic program. And then we are going to compile this information theoretic secure component to a concrete efficient SNARKs with short proofs using a proper cryptographic tool. And this time, we're going to use the bilinear pairing to do it. And this is actually different from the polynomial IOPs and polynomial commitments we've learned before. So then we will have three segments of this lecture. In the first part, I'm going to talk about this classical construction of a QAP, quadratic arithmetic program. In the second part, I'm going to show you [10:41] how to construct an efficient SNARK with a constant size proof from the QAP using bilinear pairing. And in the last part, I'm going to talk about variants of these SNARKs in this framework of linear PCP. Those include the support of R1CS, rank one constraint system, and also the variants of Groth 16 with three group elements in the proof, and also how to achieve zero knowledge in this constructions. So let's start with the QAP. So recall that our job is to build a SNARK for proving circuit satisfiability, which means that given an arithmetic circuit, C, defined over a finite field with addition gates and multiplication gates, and an output, y. The prover, p, is trying to claim that he knows a witness, w, such that C of x, w equals to y, where x is the public input known by the verifier. And for simplicity, let's ignore this public input for the time being, and assume that all the inputs are secret held by the prover. So the prover is trying to convince the verifier that he knows the satisfying assignment, the input and values of the circuit, such that C of w equals to 1. So that is the setting we are, and the problem we are trying to solve. So next, I want to reintroduce this concept of a transcript, or the trace of a computation, or a circuit. So here, I'm showing you an example of an arithmetic circuit with these addition gates and multiplication gates, and this set of values. So the trace just means that the prover is going to evaluate this entire circuit and take the values on all the wires. And for example, this is exactly the transcript defined in lecture four for interactive proofs. That is the value of an aggregate including the inputs. And then for interactive proofs, Justin talked about how to construct a sum check and multivariate polynomials representing the addition gates [12:51] and multiplication gates, and also the transcripts of this computation, and how to use the sum check protocol to check the correctness of this evaluation. Similarly in lecture five when Dunne was introducing this Plonk IOP. He also defined a trace of this computation, but it's actually slightly different from the interactive proofs. Instead of just taking the value of every gate, it actually it is actually defined as the left input, right input, and output of every gate. So there are actually some redundancies of this definition of the trace. Because one wire can both be the output of one gate, and also the input of another gate. So it's actually slightly larger than the size of the value of every gate. But still, it is derived from the valuations of the circuit. So that's why we still call it the transcript or trace of the computation. The following, the same ideas, we are going to define the transcript of QAP for this lecture. Again, it will be slightly different from both interactive proofs and Plonk. So this time, we are going to define the trace as the input plus the output of every multiplication gate. And we are going to ignore the output of addition gates this time. So to show you on this slide, and so we're going to remove the labels for the output of these two addition gates, and only count the output of every multiplication gates here, together with the input. So that is the trace we're going to talk about, we're going to use in this lecture. So again, this can actually be derived from the circuit variation. So essentially, there is no big difference, but in terms of the formal definition, [14:37] it's slightly different from the interactive proofs and the Plonk IOP. So once we do that, we can actually represent this transcript or trace as a vector. So we can just do this in any predefined order. For example, just following the topological order of the circuit evaluation. We have the six inputs, three, two, one, seven, five, four, and then the internal wires, six, and then the outputs of the multiplication gates, 48 and 72. And also for simplicity, I'm assuming that the gates before each output must be a modification gate. So that is the transcript of this computation for QAP. And then another thing to introduce is that very naturally, we're also going to label these gates in the circuit. Again, we only care about the multiplication gates for QAP, and we are just going to label them one by one. For example, we have gate one, the multiplication gate here, gate two, and gate three. So we have three multiplication gates, and the trace of this vector with nine values in the circuit with six inputs and three outputs of the multiplication gates. With that, the next concept I want to introduce is the selector polynomials. So that is the key component to reduce the problem of a circuit satisfiability to a polynomial equation, which is essentially the quadratic arithmetic problem. So let's basically spend most of the time of this segment to understand what is the definition of this selector polynomial. So I'm going to first define a set of polynomials called lix. And how can we define this? We are basically asking this question. Is each ci in this trace of the computation, the left input of gate, j. For every j, equals to one, two and three for all the gates. [16:51] If the answer is yes, we are going to put one there. And if the answer is no, we are going to put zero. OK, and here for your convenience, I'm basically labeling these values in the computation, no trace of this circuit as c1, c2, all the way to c9. So then let's take a look at an example of l1x. What is l1x? So then we are asking the question, is c1, this value is 3, the left input of gate one? So the answer is yes. This 3 is left input of the gate one, to the multiplication gate. So we put one here. And is c1 the left input of gate two? The answer is no, so we put zero here. And then finally, is c1 the left input of gate three? The answer is again no. So we put zero. So we have a vector, 100. Of side 3, the same as the side of the number of application gates. So then the way to define this l1x is through polynomial interpolation at a known set capital omega. OK. So with this set, we want this polynomial at 1x to evaluate to 1 at, for example, omega, and evaluates to zero at omega squared, and evaluates to zero again at omega to the cube. So in this way, for any predefined distinct set of values, we have a unique interpolation of the polynomial, and we can actually compute a polynomial, l1x, with degree, 3, assuming that is a monic polynomial. Meaning that the leading coefficient is one. So there is a unique degree 3 monic polynomial with these three evaluations. And up to this point, everyone should be familiar with the definition of roots of unity. This is for the convenience of polynomial computations [18:50] using the FFT algorithm. But so that is why we set, this set to be the powers generated by the root of unity. But for the algorithm to work, you can actually, for the protocol to work, you can actually use any set with distinct values. So that is how we define this polynomial, l1x, using the polynomial interpolation. Then similarly, let's take a look at l2x. Is c2 the left input of each gate? Then this c2 is the wire here. It is not the left input of gate one. It's the right input, so we put zero here. And again, it's not the right input gate two, and it's not the right input of gate three. So we have a vector of 000. And we are going to interpolate this polynomial using the fact that the evaluations are all zeros at these three points. And note that this l2x is not the zero polynomial. You can actually interpolate the polynomial with these three values as the roots. It is actually a unique degree 3 monic polynomial. So similarly, we can do it for every ci and get the [? stack ?] polynomial of lix for all I. But another interesting case I want to highlight here is for l3x. So we are asking is c3 the left input of gate I, or gate J? So it is this wire. Apparently, it is not the left input of gate one. It's not the left input of gate two, so we put zero and zero there. But the rule to define whether it's left input or not when we have an addition gate is that the values would go through these addition gates, and connects the multiplication gates. So in this case, because both 1 and 7 are actually inputs to this addition gate, and the output of this addition gate is the left input of gate three. [20:47] So because of that, we count them as the left inputs of gate 3. And because of that, we are going to put one here, denoting that c3 is the left input of gate three. So that's how we take care of wires related to addition gates, and you're going to understand why we're doing this in the very next slide. So then we are going to interpolate the polynomial using the evaluations of zero, zero, and one. So that's how we get l3x. And we just keep doing that one by one, and here is the table summarizing the evaluations of all these lx. From l1x all the way to l9x, and the evaluation should be these vectors at these three points. And we can interpolate these polynomials and get the unique polynomials of degree 3, assuming the leading coefficient is 1. That's how we define the lix. Then you may wonder, what's the properties of these polynomials? Why they are called selected polynomials? And here is the reason. So again, I'm listing this table with evaluations and vector. And I'm going to define a capital Lx polynomial as a summation of ci times lix for area. And multiplying each value in this trace, the vector, with the corresponding lix and sum them up. So once we have this capital Lx, what is the property of this polynomial? Well, let's evaluate it at different powers of the root of unity. So what is L evaluated at point omega? Oh, then by the definition of this lix, we need to evaluate them at the point omega. And basically, we are looking at the first column in this table. Because by definition, they're specifying the evaluation of l1x, l2x, l3x, and all the way to l9x [22:54] at the point of omega. And as you can see from the table, there's only one non-zero value in this column, and that is L one omega. Because of this property, there will only be one non-zero term in this entire summation. That is c1 times l1 omega. That equals to c1 itself, which equals to 3. All other values will become zero because of the evaluations of these lix at omega. So in this way, we are selecting c1 out of this big summation when evaluating L of x at omega. And then, what is c1? It's essentially the left input of this multiplication gate 1. And so because of that, the property of this capital Lx is selecting the left input of gate one when evaluated at omega. So similarly, let's take a look at what is L evaluated at omega squared? Then by the definition of these lix, we are essentially looking at the second column of this table. And again, there's only one nonzero term in this entire column, and that is l7 omega squared. Because of that, in this big summation, there will be only one nonzero term. Again, and that is c7. So we are computing c7 times l7 omega squared. That is c7 itself equals to 6. And what is this six? That is basically the left input of the second multiplication gate here. Right. So we are selecting the left input of the second gate out of all these values from the trace. Then finally, what is L evaluated at omega to the cube? Then we are looking at the third column in this table, and note here that there are actually two non zeros in the third column. They're corresponding to l3x and l4x. [25:01] Because of that, we are selecting c3 and c4, and add them up together because of the summation in this equation. So L of x evaluates to c3 plus c4 at point omega to the cube. And if you take a look at this circuit, that's exactly the left input of gate three. That is c3 plus c4 that equals to 8, which is the left input of gate 3. And that is why we don't count the output of addition gates in the transcript or tracer computation. Because there will be taken care of implicitly by this definition of the capital Lx polynomial using this big summation. We are summing them up in this big summation automatically. So with all of these kind of evaluations, the role of this capital Lx is essentially selecting the left input of every multiplication gate by evaluating at different powers of the roots of unity. So that is why it is called the selector polynomial. So with that, then very naturally we will have two more selector polynomials for the right input and output of every gate. So once we have lix, the next one we have will be rix. And we are asking the question, is each ci the right input of gate J for all J? And again, to give an example, what is r1x? We are asking whether c1 is the right input of each multiplication gate. And clearly, this is not the right input of gate one, not the right input of gate two, and not the right input of gate three. So we put 0 and 0 and 0 there. And again, we interpolate this polynomial at the same node and set generated by the root of unity. And we have a unique monic polynomial with degree 3 for r1x. Similarly, we are going to do it for r2x, r3x, all the way to r9x, and we have this another table for the selector polynomial, , rix that corresponds to the right input of every gate. [27:18] After that, we can define a capital Rx in a similar way as the capital Lx. And we are summing up ci times rix for I equals to 1 all the way to 9. And once we do that, we can actually evaluate this capital Rx at different powers of the root of unity. And what is r of omega? Again, we are looking at the first column of this table, and there's only one non-zero in this column. That is r2x, simply because c2 is the right input of this gate one. And because of that, in this entire summation, there's only one non-zero term, that is c2. So we are selecting C2 out of this trace of the computation. And similarly, if you evaluate r at omega squared, that is c3 plus c4 because there are two non zeros in the second column of this table, and they correspond to the right input of this gate two. Again, they go through these addition gates, and both of them are right input of this multiplication gate two. And finally, we have, sorry, there's a typo here. Should be r of omega to the cubed, that equals to c5 plus c6, and that is because we have r5x, and r6x to be non-zero at this point, and that corresponds to the right input of gate three. So we are essentially selecting the right inputs of every multiplication gate using this capital Rx polynomial. Finally, we have the selected polynomial, oix, for the output of each gate. And again, using an example, what is o1x? We're asking is c1 the output of gate one, gate two, or gate three? The answer is no for all of them, so we have a vector, 0, 0, and 0, and 0. And we are going to interpolate this polynomial and get a unique polynomial of degree 3. And finally, we just have this entire table [29:16] that corresponds to the output of every gate, defining the polynomials, oix. And we have the definition of this capital O of x as the summation of ci times oix using this table. And for a similar reason, when you evaluate this oix at different powers of roots of unity, it's essentially selecting the output of each multiplication gate. So O of omega equals to c7 because there's nonzero, and that is the output of this gate one. And O of omega squared is the output of gate two, O of omega cubed is the output of the gate three. So that completes the definition of these three sets of selector polynomials. So once we understand the definition of the selector polynomials, we are almost there to understand this entire construction of the QAP. And the last piece of the puzzle is this master polynomial, p of x. So I'm going to define a polynomial, p of x, as the product of Lx times R of x minus O of x. And if you expand the definitions of these polynomials, we have an equation consisting of three big parentheses. In the first parenthesis, this summation of ci times lix times the summation of ci times rix minus the summation of ci times oi of x. That is the definition of this so-called master polynomial, p of x. Once we have that, the claim is that the p of x should evaluate to zero at all powers of this root of unity defined by this public predefined set. And why is that? Let's take a look at the definition of these polynomials using this example. So we've actually went through all of these evaluations of Lx, Rx and Ox. So what is P of omega? Well, that equals to L of omega times r of omega minus O of omega. [31:33] So then what is L of omega? From previous slides, we know that this base is selecting the left input of gate one. And that should equal to c1 because of the definition. And similarly, r of omega is selecting the right input of gate one, n equals to c2. And O of omega is selecting the output of gate one, which is c7. So then P of omega simply equals to c1 times c2 minus c7. That equals to 3 times 2 minus 6, and it should be 0 in this example. That is exactly taking the left input of multiplication gate times the right input of multiplication gate minus the output of the multiplication gate. And if this trace is correct computed by evaluating the circuit, then it must be 0. Because left times right minus the output should equal to 0. For the first modification gate. Then for a similar reason, let's take a look at P of x evaluated at omega squared. Again, by the properties of these selected polynomials, we're essentially selecting the left input, right input, and the output of gate two. So the equation becomes c7 times c2 plus c4. We are taking account of the addition automatically in the definition, minus c8. And if you do the calculation, clearly, this is a zero again. So P of x equals to 0 at omega squared. And finally, P of omega cubed should also equal to 0. Because we are taking the left input of gate three times the right input of gate three minus the output of gate three, and that should be equal to 0. So because of that, we can see that as long as this ci is the correct evaluation of the circuit, is the correct trace of this computation, then p of x should be 0 for omega to the power of J for all J equals to one, two and three in this example. So finally, how can we actually show that a polynomial, P of x equal to 0 at a given locations? What is an equivalent condition? [33:53] So again, this is not saying that p of x equal to is a zero polynomial, because the degree of p of x is actually twice of the degree of Lx, and in this case, the degree is 6. So this is clearly not a zero polynomial. So this condition is equivalent of saying, to saying that p of x can be written as a product of two polynomials, Vx times the quotient polynomial, q of x, where Vx is the vanishing polynomial, defined as x minus omega times x minus omega squared times x minus omega to the QAP. This polynomial evaluates to 0 at all these three points in this set, because there's the roots of these three points. So that is why it is called the vanishing polynomial, because it vanishes to zero at all elements in this set. So basically, you're just taking the product of x minus each element in the set and multiply them together. That is the vanishing polynomial of a given set. And this polynomial is the polynomial of minimum degree that equals to zero at this given point. And also it should be a non-zero polynomial. So then any polynomial that equals to 0 at this point can always be written as the product of this vanishing polynomial times the quotient polynomial with the corresponding degree. So that is why if we can write p of x as V of x times any quotient polynomial, Q of x, it is equivalent to say that this p of x evaluated 0 at this given points. So that is the property using the vanishing polynomial. So that completes the entire story of this QAP. So that is the design of this quadratic arithmetic program. So to sum it up, essentially, we are trying to reduce the problem of this circuit satisfiability to an equivalent problem that can be represented as a polynomial equation. And so that later, we can use cryptographic tools to compile it to an efficient SNARK in practice. In particular, in this case, p is trying to claim that he knows the witness, such [36:06] that C of x, w equals to y. And through this entire definition of selector polynomials, the master polynomials, and vanishing polynomials, it is equivalent to say that the prover, p, claims to know a vector, c, which is a trace of this computation, such that this master polynomial, p of x, can be written as V of x times Q of x. And there are equivalent conditions. As long as you can do this, it means that this vector, c, is the correct trace evaluating using the circuit. So to make things a bit more general. So we have two parameters that are related to the size of the circuit. So first, we have this parameter, m, that denotes the size of this vector, the trace. That's essentially the number of inputs plus the number of outputs of the multiplication gates in the circuit. And in the literature, it is also called the extended witness, because the witness of the prover should technically be the secret input of this circuit. And the prover is evaluating this entire circuit to get this trace of the computation, and that is why it's called extended witness. Another parameter we have is the small n. That is the number of multiplication gates, and it's also the degree of each selector polynomial. Because they are defined by the polynomial interpolation at the locations, the size of which is the same as the number of multiplication gates. So we have two parameters, m and n. But they're not exactly the same, but they're on the same order. So m is the number of inputs plus the number of multiplication gates, and n is the number of multiplication gates, so they're off by the number of inputs in this example. [37:51] OK, so then again, to visualize it using this big table of selected polynomials defining the QAP. So we have these selector polynomials, lix, rix, and oix. The number of rows in this table is m. The size of this extended witness. For every value, ci, we have a corresponding lix, rix, and oix. And the degree of each polynomial is this small n. The number of multiplication gates in the circuit. Because we are defining the evaluations that this set of elements generated by different powers of the roots of unity. So the total size of this table is roughly speaking on the order of n times n is quadratic in the size of the circuit. But as you can see here, the table is quite sparse. We are asking the question whether each value is the left input of a gate or not. And if you think about it carefully, the total number of non-zeros here is linear in the number of multiplication gates in the circuit, or linear in the size of this circuit. And you can't have a circuit with all ones in the table. So because of that, there exists a sparse representation of this entire table. And another important property to highlight here is that this table is a public information. It does not depend on any values or this witness in the circuit known by the proof. They are solely defined by the structure of the circuit, whether each wire connects to a certain gate or not. So because of that, this table can be generated in a preprocessing phase, which is actually important in the construction of the real SNARK. OK, so that's why in this equation, defining the master polynomial, I'm using this blue color to represent those polynomials, which are known both by the prover and the verifier. So they are public information, and can be pre-computed with a sparse representation. [39:58] And the secret value only known by the prover is these ci's. So there are actually derived from the witness, the secret input of the circuit, and the prover evaluates this entire circuit, and they get this extended witness of ci's. And this QAP, the prover is trying to convince the verifier that the ci's satisfy this set of equations. This p of x can be written as the polynomial, V of x, times the q of x, where the vector polynomial is again public information, and this quotient polynomial is a secret information known only by the [INAUDIBLE].. So in this way, we complete the description of this entire QAP. So essentially, we are reducing the problem of a circuit satisfiability to a quadratic arithmetic program, showing that the polynomial, p of x, has this property that can be decomposed as V of x times q of x. And they're equivalent with each other. As long as there exists such a ci passing this check, then it means that the circuit, the prover knows the assignment of the circuit that can be satisfied and give you this corresponding output. So that is quadratic arithmetic program. Welcome back. In the second segment of the lecture, I'm going to show you how to compile a quadratic arithmetic program to a SNARK with the constant proof size using cryptographic tools. So before showing you the detailed construction of the SNARK, I want to explain a little bit more about the model of a linear PCP. So first, we have this classical model of a probabilistically checkable proofs, in which the prover can actually generate this PCP Oracle, and you can think of it as a big message of a polynomial size. And instead of sending it directly to the verifier, the verifier can actually make several point queries, asking what is the elements of this big vector. And with this point curious, the verifier is able to verify the correctness of the computation, [42:12] or the prover nodes satisfying assignment of the circuit efficiently. And this was a big breakthrough in the complexity theory and then the early SNARK constructions of [INAUDIBLE] and Micali were based on this PCP model. Essentially, they're compiling the probabilistically checkable proofs into a real SNARK using Merkle trees on top of this PCP Oracle. So instead of sending this PCP Oracle directly to the verifier, the prover can commit to this PCP Oracle using the Merkle tree, and sends only the root of the Merkle tree to the verifier. And later to answer these point queries, the prover additionally attaches the Merkle tree proof to the verifier with logarithmic size in the size of the PCP Oracle. So in this way, they were able to build a syntactic good SNARKs for a large class of computations. So then in analogy to this classical PCP model, there are several generalizations of the model that we've learned in previous lectures. So the first one is the interactive PCP proposed by Kalai and Raz in 2008, and also the interactive Oracle proofs, proposed by Ben-Sasson, Chiesa, and Spooner in 2016. So in this model, instead of sending a single Oracle, the prover can actually interact with the verifier, and sends multiple oracles during these interactions. And note that it's only interesting with the interactions. Otherwise, the prover can just send all of these oracles together as in the original PCP. And after that, the verifier can make point queries from all of these oracles, and then check the correctness of the computation. And this IOP is actually the model used in the FRI protocol explained in the previous lecture. And again, we can compile an IPC or IOP to a real smart system using Merkle trees, [44:10] and this Merkle tree is again the cryptographic primitive we use. So we are going to build the Merkle tree for on top of each Oracle, and then sends the Merkle tree proofs for these point queries. And again, this generalization improves the efficiency of these oracles and the prover time significantly in practice. Another generalization we've learned before is this polynomial IOP. For example, it was used in the Plonk system. And the polynomial IOP was formalized by Bunz-Fisch and Szepieniec in 2020 in the dark paper. So in this model, instead of sending a string as in the original PCP, the Oracle is a polynomial generated by the prover. And the verifier can make evaluation queries on chosen points of the polynomial, and the Oracle replies with F of r to the verifier for the verifier to verify the correctness of the computation. And then in order to compile it to a real SNARK, we have these polynomial commitments, as we learned in the previous two or three lectures. So instead of sending the polynomial to the verifier or post it on the fly, the prover commits to the polynomial and open it at these points using the polynomial commitments. So again, we have the components of polynomial IOP and then the polynomial commitments of the cryptographic parameter. So then in analogy to all of these models, here's the model of a linear PCP. So again, it's a generalization of the classical PCP model, and was proposed by Ishai Kushilevitz and Ostrovsky in 2007 paper. So in this linear PCP model, the Oracle generated by the prover is a linear function. So you can think of it as an Oracle defined by, for example, vector, c. And again, instead of sending it directly to the verifier, [46:12] the verifier can make queries to this Oracle. And now the queries are actually linear functions. So the verifier can submit again, a vector, let's say, a Q1 of the same size as c for example. And the Oracle will compute the inner product between this c and the verifier query, q, and return a single value to the verifier. So this defines a linear function for the Oracle and the query. So that is why it's called linear PCP. So the prover is only allowed to post these linear oracles and verifier is only allowed to make linear queries from these oracles. So that is the linear PCP model. So then the quadratic arithmetic program I explained in the first part of the lecture can actually be categorized as a linear PCP in exactly this model. And here's the reason why. So recall that in the quadratic arithmetic problem, we are trying to, the prover is trying to convince the verifier that this master polynomial computed using the extended witness, ci, and the public sector polynomials, lix, rix, and oix, can be written as the product between vanishing polynomial. Again, this is public, and the secret quotient polynomial, q of x. And then we show that this is equivalent to a circuit satisfiability. So then in order to show this, we can actually apply the linear PCP model. And this linear PCP Oracle is simply the extended witness, c, and also the coefficients of this q of x. Then with this Oracle, one way to check this equation is again, evaluating it at a random point. And so the verifier can compute this evaluation of this polynomial equation at the random point, gamma. And to do that, the verifier can only submit linear queries to this Oracle. [48:14] And the first query is the inner product between c and the evaluations of li at the random point, gamma. And here, I'm abusing the notation informally to use this bold letter to denote the vector for all I, like L1 gamma, L2 gamma, and so forth. So then the value in the first parenthesis is simply the inner product between c and li gamma. And similarly, the second component is again the inner product between c and the second query from the verifier. And then we have c, the inner probability c, and the third query from the verifier. And then finally, V of gamma can be evaluated locally by the verifier, and q of x, the evaluation of q of x can be viewed as an inner product between the coefficients of q and this vector generated by the random point, gamma. So in this way, the verifier can actually check this equation using four linear queries to this linear PCP Oracle. And if this equation is true, then by the schwartz-zippel Lemma, we know that with high probability, this polynomial equation on the master polynomial is also true. So this gives you one way to check the validity of this master polynomial of quadratic arithmetic program in the linear PCP model. So that is why QAP is actually a instantiation of linear PCP. But note that here, in the real problem that I'm going to present next, we are not using this random queries and not using schwartz-zippel Lemma. We are using another cryptographic tool to do it, as I'm going to show you right now. So that is the model of a linear PCP. So what I'm going to do next is again, in analogy to the classical PCP polynomial IOP, and the IOP and PCP. So now, we have the correct arithmetic program. That is the information theoretic component in the linear PCP model. [50:14] And next, I'm going to show you how to compile it to a real SNARK with a constant size proof using the cryptographic tools. So the cryptographic primitive we are going to use is actually our old friend, bilinear pairing. And recall that in lecture six, I explained this definition of bilinear pairing, and use it to construct a KZG binomial commitment. And here, we're going to use it again to construct this SNARKs based on linear PCP and quadratic arithmetic problem. So by linear pairing, we have these parameters of bilinear group, where this G is the base group, and the Gt is the target group. And both of them are of order, p. And small g is the generator of the base group. And there is a key operation called bilinear pairing. It takes two group elements in the base group as input, and computes one element in the target group. And the rule of this computation is basically, computing the multiplication in the exponent, and then bringing it to the target group. And as an example, the power of this bilinear pairing is actually to verify the correctness of the product in the exponent. So given G to the x and G to the y, a pairing can check that if some element h is g to the xy or not without knowing x and y. So that is the two of bilinear pairing we are going to use. So now let's see how can we use this cryptographic primitive to compile the QAP into a real SNARK with constant size proof? Again, here I'm showing you the master polynomial we're trying to check. And again, to emphasize, these ci's are secret values, extend the witness known only by the prover. And these lix, rix, and oix, these are public selected polynomials defined by the circuit, and they're known by both the prover and the verifier. And they can be computed in a preprocessing phase, because they only depend on the circuit, [52:17] but not on any secret value. And similarly, we have the public vanishing polynomial, V of x. And this quotient polynomial is computed, for example, through the polynomial division, and is only known by the. So then instead of sending these ci's and q of x directly to the verifier as in the linear PCP model, here's what we are going to do. There is a setup phase of this SNARK based on linear, based on a quadratic arithmetic program. So in the setup phase, first we are going to generate the parameters of a bilinear group, and then compute this set of public keys. In this case, we are calling it as a proven key that will be used by the prover. So this proven key is basically evaluating each selector polynomial at a secret evaluation point out chosen by this preprocessor. So we're going to compute G to the li tou, G to the oi tou, and G to the oi tou for all I from 1 to n. And note that these are the selected polynomials, lix, rix, and oix, evaluated at location and raised to the exponent of g. Then the second half of the proven key, we're going to evaluate G to the tau, G to the tou square and so forth, all the way to G to the tou to the n. And note that this is exactly the same global parameters as in the KZG polynomial commitments, and also as in the Plonk marlin SNARK systems. And this is the same kind of trust setup process as these SNARKs. But in addition, in order for the SNARKs, based on QAP or lineage to work, we also need these additional terms in the proven key, as shown on the slide. And these proven keys depend on the circuit. They are defined by the selected polynomial, which are again, defined by the connections of the circuit. And that is why this preprocessing phase is circuit dependent. For every computation you're trying to prove, [54:21] you have to generate a different set of query keys. And then we have a verification key, which is G to the power of V evaluated at tau, where V is the vanishing polynomial. And that is known by the verifier. After this, the most important step is we have to delete this tau completely. And that is why this is called the trusted setup, and it's a circuit dependent. So that is the key generation algorithm of this talk. So next, let's see why we are generating this set of public keys. How can we use them to compress the prover's messages of these extended minutes and the quotient polynomials? So the way to do it, or the key idea is to actually compute each term of this monster polynomial in the parentheses using the valuation at the secret location tau, and raised to the exponent of g. So in the first element in the proof, we are going to compute pi 1, which equals to G to the power of summation ci times ioi pi. And if you take a look at this, the term in the exponent of g is exactly the first polynomial in the first parenthesis evaluated at the location secret point tau. So that is pi 1. And again, following the same derivation as shown in the polynomial commitment, this pi 1 can be evaluated by the prover without knowing the secret key, tau. And it can be computed using the public parameter, G, to the power of ioi tau. So essentially, you're raising each term of g the li tau to the corresponding coefficient, ci in the extended witness. And then multiply them together, you can get a single element, pi 1. Then similarly, the provers can compute pi 2 using the polynomial in the second parentheses. So that is G to the power of summation, ci times ri tau. [56:16] And this can be evaluated using the second set of public key. And then we have pi 3 that equals to G to the power of summation, ci times oi tau. And finally, we have pi 4, which is equal to G to the power of q tau, where q is the quotient polynomial. And this can be evaluated using the last set of public parameters in a similar way as the KZG polynomial commitment. Just raise each key to the corresponding coefficients of this polynomial, q of x. So in this way, the prover generates four group elements as the proof to the verifier, and that's the proof algorithm in this SNARK. So finally, how can the verifier verify the correctness of this computation? So again, the idea is to actually check the correctness of this equation. The master polynomial equals to v of x times q of x in the exponent. So we already have all of these terms in these four proofs, and we merely need to check the relationship, the product relationship, as shown in this equation. And in order to do that, we need a bilinear pairing operation. And here's the equation to check it. The verifier is going to compute the pairing between pi 1 and pi 2, and here, if the prover is honest, then the pi 1 and pi 2 will be computed as shown on the slide. Then the pairing between them will give you the product between this value and this value, which is exactly the same as the product of the first polynomial. The first parenthesis, and the second polynomial, and the second parenthesis, as in this polynomial equation, evaluated at the point, tau. And then, the verifier is going to divide it by the pairing of pi 3 and the G itself. So that gives you subtracting exponent by the summation of ci times oi tau, and that is the third term in this equation. Finally, on the right hand side, the verifier [58:22] trying to compute v of x times q of x evaluated at this point, tau. So how can we do that? Again, bilinear pairing. And the verifier is going to compute the pairing of G to the V of tau, which is given as the verification key. And also, is a known information with pi 4, which is generated by the proof. And again, if the prover is honest, this is G to the q of tau, and the right hand side gives you G to the V of tau times q of tau in the exponent in the target group. So then if following all of these derivations, that gives you the first polynomial time second polynomial minus the third polynomial equals to vx times q of x. All evaluated at this secret location, tau, in the exponent. So that is why we can, the verifier can actually check this master polynomial equation using the bilinear pair. And again, the reason why we need bilinear pairing is we are checking the product relationship in the exponent. And without bilinear pairing, the verifier is not able to do that because of the computational diffie-hellman assumption. So that is the complete description of this SNARK protocol. And actually, this version of the protocol is not the real version. It's actually not secure. But the reason why I'm showing you this first is it already highlights the key idea of this construction of the SNARK based on QAP. So in the next part, I'm going to show you several problems of this version of the protocol, and also how to fix these problems to get the real SNARK protocol. But just for your information, these changes won't affect the key ideas, and also the complexity of this SNARK protocol. [60:12] So let's do that one by one. So the first problem of this protocol is we already explained if the prover is honest, then all the derivation follows, and you can actually pass the verification. But now, what about security? If the prover's malicious, is the protocol secure? Well, I'm not going to go into the formal security proofs. These are actually quite technical, and you can refer to the original papers for the real security proof. But I will just highlight certain intuitions about the problems. And the first problem is, how can we make sure that a malicious prover is really using the set of public parameters to compute these proofs? And we have this nice structured public parameters in the proving key, but there's no guarantee that the prover is using them to compute pi 1. But what if the prover is computing this pi 1, pi 2, pi 3, pi 4, just using some random numbers, and it happens to pass those verification? And then there's no guarantee that the prover is really proving the satisfiability of the circuit. So then the solution is actually some techniques we've learned before in the KZG polynomial implement. Either using the knowledge of exponent assumption, or the generic group model. So to remind you a little bit, so in the knowledge of exponent assumption, for every proof you are trying to compute using a set of public keys, we are going to generate an additional set of public parameters using a secret number, alpha. And then compute G to the alpha times li tau. So it's a counterpart of the original piping parameters. And then for every proof, pi 1, you want to the prover is trying to generate, you also ask for a counterpart, pi 1 prime, [62:05] generated using the second set of public parameters. And with that, the verifier has an additional check, is using bilinear pairing. She's going to check the pairing of pi 1 and G2 alpha, where G2 alpha should also be part of the verification key, and I'm omitting here for simplicity. The pairing of these two should equal to the pairing between pi 1 prime and the generator, G. And if the prover can pass this verification then by the knowledge of exponent assumption, the prover has to compute pi 1 as G to the power of ioi tau times some coefficients chosen by the prover. So that is the knowledge of exponent assumption, and if you apply this to all of the proofs in the vanilla version, it's quite for, we can actually solve this first issue. And this is used in this PGHR13 paper, in the Pinocchio construction. Another solution is again discussed with, discussed in the KZG polynomial committment called generic group model. So here, we don't need to do any additional check. So this is a different model, and informally speaking, the adversary is only given an Oracle to compute the group operations. So that is why given G to the power of ioi tau, that is a typo, should be G to the li tau without alpha. The adversary can only compute their linear combinations, meaning that they cannot just generate a random number that it happens to be a group element on the curve. So because of that, in the GGM model, informally speaking, the adversary has to use these global parameters, the proving key, to generate the proof. And this solution is used in Groth 16. And again, the real proof is much more involved because the verse is not only has access to this public parameters. It also has access to other parts [64:02] of the private parameters, and you have to use some tricks to formally prove that you can actually extract the coefficients from the, proper coefficients from the inverse. But this is the high level idea to solve the first problem. Making sure that the inverse is really using the public keys to generate these proofs. So that's the first patch towards the real protocol. Then the second problem is somehow related to the first problem. So with the knowledge of exponent assumption and GGM, we can make sure that the prover is using the public key to generate these proofs. But there is no guarantee that the prover is using the same coefficient, the same extended witness to compute pi 1, pi 2, and pi 3. So here, I'm showing you the original version, the vanilla protocol that I described before. Note here that pi 1, pi 2, and pi 3 are supposed to be computed using the same set of ci's in order to make sure that it is the equivalent version of quadratic arithmetic program to the original circuit satisfiability. Even with KOE or GGM, you can only make sure that pi 1 is computed using this G to the power of li tau times some, times some elements. And pi 2 is G to the power of r tau times some elements that could be potentially different from pi 1. That's the only guarantee you have from KOE or GGM. And if you only use these checks, this protocol is not secure. That is because if we allow the prover to use different vectors in the computation of pi 1 and pi 2, this is not corresponding to the original circuit satisfiability problem. And the quadratic arithmetic program is, this master equation, is saying that if and only if the prover is using the same ci's as in these computations, this is equivalent to the original circuit evaluation [66:05] or circuit satisfiability. And informally, intuitively speaking, you can see the reason as follows. So these are selector polynomials, as I explained before. Selecting left input, right input, and output of the circuit. So the master polynomial only makes sense if the prover is using the same ci's for the selected polynomials to select from. If the prover is allowed to use different vectors, then the computation is not even relevant to the original circuit. You are selecting some values from one vector, and selecting some other values from another vector, and selecting some values from the third vector, and then they satisfy certain multiplication relationship. And this has nothing to do with the original circuit evaluation. So that is the second problem. So how to make sure that the prover is using the same ci's in the computation of these three proofs? So then the solution is to introduce an additional set of public parameters in the proving key. So this set of proving key is G to the power of beta times li tau plus ri tau plus oi tau. And also we need to include G to the beta as part of the proving key and the verification key. So with this set of public keys in addition to pi 1 all the way to pi 4, we ask the prover to generate an additional proof, pi 5, which equals to the product of G to the pi beta li tau plus ri tau plus oi tau raised to the power of ci. And this compute can be computed using this new set of public keys. Essentially, the prover is raising each element of this public key to the corresponding power of ci for each element in the extended witness. And that's pi five. Again, a single group element. [68:01] So what's the purpose of this additional proof and additional proving key? So it turns out there is actually a nice relationship between this pi 1 all the way through pi 3 and pi five if these are generated honestly, using the same ci's. So you can see here that if the prover is using the same ci in pi 1, pi 2, and pi 3, if we multiply pi 1, pi 2, and pi 3 together, multiplication gives you summation in the exponent, and for each I, there will be a common factor of ci in the exponent. So because of that, we can actually track the ci out of the computation, and that gives us the summation of ioi tau plus ri tau plus oi tau together times ci in the exponent. And that's what we're doing exactly here on the left hand side of this new equation to check. And on the right hand side, we have this summation of li tau, ri tau, and oi tau given by the new public. And then we're going to raise it to the coefficient of ci, and if the prover is honest, this verification should pass because we have the same kind of ci times the summation of this li, ri and oi in the exponent. So that's the purpose of this additional check. And to put it in the opposite direction, if the prover is malicious and is cheating using different vectors in the computation of pi 1, pi 2, and pi 3, then when we multiply these three proofs together, there won't be a common vector for the same I. So there is no way for the poor to express this product as this set of public key is raising to the same coefficients, ci. Because you're using different vectors or values in the computation of pi 1, pi 2, pi 3. And that is why intuitively speaking, the prover cannot pass this additional check if the prover is cheating. So that is the solution to the second problem. So with this additional check, we can make sure that prover is using the same set of coefficients in the generation of pi 1, pi [70:23] 2, and pi 3. And that is why it enforces this original quadratic arithmetic program, which is equivalent to the circuit satisfiability problem. Finally, we have the last problem. So far, we've talked about the simplified version, where we are assuming that this entire input of the circuit is the witness of the prover. The prover is trying to convince the verifier that he knows a satisfying assignment of the circuit. But in practice, in many interesting applications and computations, we need to have some public inputs that are known both to the prover and the verifier. So then how can we support this general case in the construction of this SNARK? So right now, instead of proving C of w equals to y, we are proving C of x, w equals to y, where w is the secret witness known by the prover. x is the public input, and y is the public output. So how can we support this version? Well, it turns out the fix to this issue is actually relatively simple because of the nice algebraic structure of the proof. So in the, again, in the vanilla version or original version I was describing, each proof, I'm using pi 1 as an example, equals to g to the power of summation, ci times li tau for all I, from 1 to n. So we are summing over all values in this extended witness that corresponds to all the evaluations of the circuit in the output of multiplication gates and the input. When we have some public inputs and outputs, it just means that somewhere buyers will have the values that are known by the verifier, instead of only secret to the prover. So then we can actually decompose this original proof, pi 1, into two parts. In the new proof, the first part is only known by the prover, and I'm calling these vars as the set Imid. [72:33] Instead of all vars from 1 to m, this is a subset called Imid known only to the prover. That includes the secret witness known by the prover, and all the evaluations related to this secret witness. And then the prover is going to compute the new pi 1 as g to the power of summation over this set of Imid ci times li tau, instead of summing over I equals to 1 to n. Then after that, we have a second component, which are the public values known by the verifier. And then I call it, I of IO, standing for public input and public output. Then the verifier can compute g to the power of summation, I, belongs to I/O, ci times li tau. And because of this nice algebraic structure of the proof, if we multiply pi 1 with this, the new pi 1 with the second component, you get the original pi 1 because multiplication gives you summation in the exponent. So which means that if you have some public inputs and public outputs on certain wires, the pool is just going to generate this new pi 1 as g to the power of I belongs to I mean, ci times li tau. And the verifier can recover this original pi, I'm calling it pi 1 star here. By multiplying pi 1 with g to the power of I in IO, ci times li tau exponent. And similarly, the verifier and prover can do the same thing for pi 2 and pi 3, and I'm omitting the formal equation for them. And I'm just going to call this original pi 2 and pi 3 as pi 2 star and pi 3 star. Once we do that, we can just perform the original check. The verifier can perform the pairing between pi 1 star and pi 2 star divided by the pairing between pi 3 star and g, and check if it is same as the pairing of g to the v tau with pi 4, as in the original version. So that's the fix to the third problem. But now we have some public inputs or public output. Just move these tau's to the verifier side. And because of this nice algebraic structure in the exponent, the proof remains a constant size. [74:50] And of course, that requires some changes in the key generation algorithm because the proven key now only includes this public parameters that corresponds to these intermediate values known only by the prover. And the verification key now needs to include these wires for the input and output. So that's the patch for the third problem. With all these three patches, we end up with the formal protocol of a real SNARK constructed from the quadratic arithmetic program. And this version was actually proposed by the Pinocchio paper, in PGHR13. And here, I'm listing the formal algorithm to put everything together. And as you can see here, in the key generation, we have the proven key, which is g to the power of these selector polynomials, and also another term to make sure that prover is using the same set of coefficients to generate all the proofs for all I, for buyers owned by the prover, known by the prover. And we also have g to the beta, and g to the tau, g to tau square, and all the way to g to the tau of x, g evaluate the quotient [INAUDIBLE].. In the verification key, we have g to the v tau, as I specified in the vanilla protocol. And we also have the additional verification key that corresponds to the wires that are known publicly by the verifier. And in order to generate the proof, the prover computes this pi 1, pi 2, pi 3, and pi 4 for these polynomials in this monster binomial equation of QAP, and also pi 5 to show that the coefficients of these terms are the same. And to verify the correctness of this proof, the verifier first computes the pi 1 star, pi 2 star, and pi 3 star, and then check these two parent equations. And if these checks are true, then the verifier knows that the prover is computing the circuit [76:50] evaluation correctly, that satisfies the quadratic arithmetic program equation. So that is the formal description of this SNARK based on QAP. So finally, to see the properties of this SNARK, again, from the Pinocchio paper, the scheme has a per circuit trusted setup phase. The public keys are, I mean, are dependent on the connections of the circuit because of the selector polynomials. And if you still remember the bit table for these selector polynomials, technically speaking, the total size is quadratic, but there is a sparse representation because of the sparsity of the matrix. Sparsity of the table. So because of that, there is an efficient algorithm to generate all of these public parameters in linear time in the number of, in terms of group exponentiation, in the number of size of the circuit. And to generate the proof, there are two main components of the prover algorithm. First, the poor has to run this FFT algorithm to interpolate these polynomials, and compute polynomial applications and divisions as I described in the QAP polynomial equation. After that, the prover needs to compute the linear number of group exponentiations in the size of the circuit to compute these proofs, by raising each public key to the corresponding power of the coefficients, and multiply them together. And the main power of this SNARK construction is that it has a very short proof, the proof consists of a constant number of group elements in the base group. So in the version I described in Pinocchio, it has only five group elements that is secure in the GGM model. And in practice, it is only hundreds of bytes. That is one of the shortest proof size among all the SNARKs. And the verifier time is also very efficient. [78:54] If we ignore the part for dealing with input and output, the verifier time is only constant. Is a constant number of pairing equations and bilinear pairing operations, and currently speaking, it's very efficient. Less than 1 millisecond. But to be precise, the verifier also has to compute the linear number of group exponentiations and the number of public input and output. So in practice, this part can be a little bit more costly for the verifier, but there are additional optimizations to further improve this part. For example, if your input and output is really big, you can actually compute the hash of these input and output inside the SNARK. And then in this way, the public input and output of the SNARK becomes constant, and this computation is negligible. And the verifier can actually check the hash outside of SNARK, and then verify the SNARK in constant time. So that is the property of this SNARK based on the quadratic arithmetic program. So in the next segment, I'm going to show you some other variants of this construction based on QAP. So the first thing I want to briefly explain in this last part of the lecture is the R1CS, rank one constraint system. So essentially, this is a generalized computation model replacing the arithmetic circuit for this type of SNARKs based on QAP and linear PCP, and it is widely used in practice. So actually, if you understand the construction of these QAPs and selected polynomials, it's actually fairly easy to generalize it to support the so-called R1CS, and let's see how it works. So remember in the example, in the first part of the lecture. This is the computation of arithmetic circuit, and taking the selected polynomial out at lix example, we're essentially asking the question whether each value is the left input of a gate. [81:07] And if it is, we're going to put 1, and then if it is not, we're going to put 0, and we're going to interpolate it to find the unique polynomial lix. But then a very natural question is, why do we restrict ourselves to either 0 or 1? We can actually generalize these polynomials to work on any publicly known constant. And then we can still interpolate these polynomials and see what happens for this entire computation system. So then let's do that. So now, instead of computing only the left input times, right input minus output, we can have this generalized constraint in this form. Still, it has three pairs of parentheses. Something times something else minus something equal to zero. But then inside each parenthesis, we can have actually a linear combination on the entire extended witness. We can select multiple elements from the extended witness, and multiply them with some public constant. And then let's see how can we define the selected polynomials for this type of constraint. Then by this equation, let's take a look at the first parenthesis. We are summing up ci times lix. So in order to map to this constraint, L1 omega should equal to 3, assuming that this is for the first gate or first constraint. And l5 omega equals to 5, and l7 omega equals to negative 7. And for other omega, other than 1, 5, and 7, they're all equal to zero. Then if you compute the summation of ci times lix, that will give you 3 times c1 plus 5 times c5 minus 7 times c7 in the first pair of parentheses. Similarly, we can define rix as r2 omega equals to 6, r9 omega equal to 10, and everything else is equal to 0. And if you compute the second parenthesis summation of ci times rix, that will give you 6 times c2, plus 10 times c9. And similarily, you can define oix as o3 omega equal to 1, [83:26] and then o8 omega equals to negative 2. That gives you the computation in the third parentheses. After that, we are going to interpolate these polynomials to find unique selected polynomials with the appropriate evaluations and degree. And after that, everything else remained exactly the same as the original protocol I presented for the arithmetic circuit. The only difference is instead of defining things as 0 and 1, we can define them as any public constant. And in this way, the same system can support this kind of generalized constraint, where you have a linear computation on the extended witness times another linear computation equals to the third linear computation. And that's exactly called rank one constraint system. And that's it. That's a simple generalization. So apparently, arithmetic circuit can be written as rank one constraint system, as we've shown in the previous example. But rank one constraint system can support the so-called generalized constraint or generalized gates in this form. So that is why it's more powerful and more convenient to use in practice. And also, another thing to highlight here is that by defining these polynomials properly, we are computing these linear computations. Like additions, subtractions, and multiply by constant, implicitly inside each parenthesis. So that is why these additions, multiplications, and the scalar multiplications by constant are almost for free in SNARK systems for R1CS. So that's another aspect to optimize for real world computations. So that is R1CS. And another important property of R1CS that we're sharing is the matrix view of this R1CS. So here we have some parameters of R1CS. [85:22] So now m is the size of the extended witness, and n is the number of constraints. The generalized gates. OK? So now we can view this extended witness as a vector. And to compute the value in the first parenthesis, it is equivalent to select y values from the vector and multiply them by some public known constant. And this can be done by a matrix vector multiplication. The matrix has dimension n by m, where m is the same as the size of c. So you're computing the inner product between each row and this vector. So that's essentially selecting values from this extended witness and multiply by public constants. And then you're going to do it n times for n constraints. And similarly we are going to compute r times c for another public matrix and o times c for the output matrix. After that, the result of these three computations are just three vectors of size n each. Then finally, we're just going to check the first vector times the second vector, element y equals to the third vector. So that is the matrix view of R1CS. We are computing exactly the same constraint system as I described in the previous slide. OK. And the reason why it is convenient to view things like this is because we can actually propose new SNARK systems for R1CS following this matrix view. All we need to do is to support these two building blocks, a linear check, and a Hadamard product check. So the approach is to first, for example, for a committed extended witness from the prover, the prover needs to prove to the verifier that the matrix vector product gives you another committed vector. And that's a linear relationship because the matrix is [87:17] a publicly known information. So that is why this is called the linear check, and we can perform the linear check for these three matrix vector products. And after that, the verifier ends up with the commitments of three vectors of size n. And the only remaining step is to check the Hadamard product relationship, which is the element wise product. The first vector times the second vector element wise equals to the third vector. And once both checks are true, then we have a valid R1CS system and assignment. So that is a very convenient view of R1CS, and the common approach to designing SNARKs for R1CS. And this has been used in bulletproofs, Martin and Spartan, and so on for SNARK systems beyond those based on QAPs. So the second variant I want to briefly discuss is this popular construction of Groth 16. So this has the smallest proof size among all smart systems with only three group elements in the proof. And it is actually indeed, based on the QAP from the Pinocchio paper I explained earlier. And here, I want to show how can we further reduce the proof size. So recall that the goal is still to check the QAP master polynomial equation. P of x can be decomposed as V of x times q of x. And recall that there were five elements in the original proof. We have the proof, pi 1, for the polynomial in the first parenthesis, and then pi 2 for a second parenthesis, pi 3 for the third parenthesis, pi 4 for the quarter polynomial. And pi five showing that the prover is computing these proofs using the same coefficients. And turns out we can actually combine the last three group elements together using one new group element, pi 3. And the way is as follows. So first, you can see here that pi 1, pi 2 almost [89:19] remains unchanged. Pi 1 still equals to g to the power of ci times li tau. But in addition, we are going to add alpha to it, where alpha is again a secret key competed in the trusted setup. And g to the alpha should be in the public parameters for both the prover and the verifier. And similarly, pi 2 equals g to the beta plus the original ci times ri tau. And now the pi 3 will be changed to take into account all the remaining checks from the perform. As you can see here, pi 3 equals to g to the power of ci beta times li tau, plus alpha times ri tau, plus oi tau, and plus v tau times qe tau. So the last term is computing this product of the quotient polynomial as the original pi for g to the q tau. Inside this parentheses, you have ci times oi tau. So that is for the third parentheses, and they're combined together. Again, it is actually not hard to see this because you can just move the third term to the right hand side of the equation, and have Vx times qx plus the third term. And the remaining term for the purpose of proving that the prover is actually using the same ci. And the new verifier algorithm becomes the pairing between pi 1 and pi 2, should equal to the pairing between pi 3 and the generator, times the pairing of g to alpha and g to the beta, assuming that both g to the alpha and g to the beta are in the verification key now. And the way to see this equation is that if you multiply the exponent of pi 1 and pi 2, you will have the product of this summation times the summation that is the original master polynomial equation. And that should equal to ci times oi tau plus b tau times q of tau, by moving the third term to the right hand side. [91:24] So you have these terms in the exponent by this pairing check. Then you have some additional terms. When you multiply the exponent of pi 1, pi 2, you have beta times ci times li, the summation of this. And that's taken care of by this first term in the new pi 3. You also have the cross term, alpha times the summation of ci times ri tau, and that's taken care of by the second term of this new summation. And the fact that you're computing all of this using this new public key guarantees that the prover resulting is the same ci as pi 1 and pi 2. If you prove it formally. And finally, you will have an actual term, g to the alpha times beta, and that can be checked by computing this g to the r, pairing of g to alpha and G to the beta in the verification key, and this can be done ahead of time in the verification. So that is the kind of high level idea to further reduce the proof size from five elements to three elements only. And that is the improvement of a Goth 16. And again, to be precise, this is actually not the actual algorithm. So this is only the giving the intuition of this new algorithm. Combining these three elements into one in the new pi 3. So the real algorithm, you can take account, take into account the intermediate wires known only by the prover, and also the public input and public output. You also need to ensure zero knowledge on top of that. So for the real protocol, please refer to the Groth 16 paper for details. So basically to summarize the properties, you also need to change the key generation accordingly with these new public parameters. And now the proof size becomes three group elements only. And depending on the bilinear elliptic curves, appearing friendly curves you're using in practice, [93:24] it can be as low as 144 bytes in practice. So that's very impressive. And the verifier time becomes a single parent equation with three bilinear pairing in the check. So these are very efficient in practice. So the last variant I want to highlight is achieving the zero knowledge. So as we always been doing, so in most of the lectures of this course so far, we always focus on the playing protocol with correctness and soundness. And we don't usually talk about zero knowledge. That is because usually, it is not hard to achieve zero knowledge. You just add some randomizer to these proofs to achieve zero knowledge. For example, I showed you a version of zero knowledge [INAUDIBLE] commitment in lecture six. And here, we are actually following a similar idea. So again, I'm listing the original protocol of the Pinocchio construction for simplicity. And I'm only showing you the pi 1 all the way to pi 4 here. OK, so again, this version is not zero knowledge for a similar reason as I explained earlier in lecture six. It is deterministic. Although it's not revealing all the values of circuit, because it's only a single group element. But you can infer some information from these proofs. You can make a hypothesis whether all the values are zero in the circuit and check whether the proof will give you the same proof. In this way, you can kind do this brute force search attack to infer information about the values. And formally speaking, there's no way for you to construct a simulator in the proof to prove zero knowledge. And a way to fix it is to actually introduce some randomizers to randomize these proofs. And for on top of Pinocchio, the zero knowledge version [95:16] is fairly simple. The way to do it is to randomize this value by adding an extra term in the exponent. And again, you can try to add the random number, delta 1, delta 2, and delta 3 in the proofs, but then you realize that will ruin the relationship of these proofs, and the parent equation to check no longer holds. So then the right way to randomize it is to actually introduce a delta 1 times the vanishing polynomial, B of tau, to each proof. Because of that, when you multiply these two polynomials together in the exponent, it is still divisible by the vanishing polynomial, because you have a common factor in all of these products. So in this way with these randomizers, we can formally prove that you can actually simulate these proofs without knowing the real witness of the prover. And at the same time, the scheme also has a knowledge size by the same parent equation check, and a slightly different proof. So this is the idea to achieve zero knowledge in the original version of the Pinocchio paper based on QAP. And for the Groth16 version, it is a slightly different, but still you're trying to add some randomizers to these proofs, and still preserving the parent equation to check. So that's the variant of zero knowledge. So that is everything we will talk about for SNARKs based on linear PCP and QAP. And in the next lecture, then we'll talk about the construction of recursive SNARKs. So thank you for listening.