[00:01] PRATYUSH MISHRA: Hello. Hi, everyone. I'm Pratyush. And together with Alex Ozdemir, I'm going to be lecturing on programming zero knowledge proof systems. All right, let's get started. So let's say you have an idea for an application. It could be a private payment system, could be a private voting application. You know, anything, where you think a zero knowledge proof system might be useful. So how do you actually get started expressing this idea and implementing it? So if you're a programmer, the first thing that comes to mind would be to try to implement your idea as a program in some high level programming language, like, say, a C, or a Python, or a Java, or something similar. Unfortunately, zero knowledge proofs, they don't understand these high level programming languages and, instead, understand things, like constraint systems or arithmetic circuits, right? So say, we have somehow expressed our idea in this arithmetic circuit or constraint system form. Then, we can feed this circuit into, say, the zero knowledge proof system set up algorithm, which will produce some public parameters for us, which we can then go ahead and use for proving and then, later, verification, OK? But how do we actually go from our idea into this format that the zero knowledge proof system understands? Well, this is going to be the focus of this lecture, exactly how to take your idea and make it into a format, which the zero knowledge proof system can understand and then prove. OK, so in this lecture, we'll start by first doing a high level overview of what it means to program a zero knowledge proof, and then dive into three different ways that prominent frameworks try to do this. [01:58] The first approach will be to use a hardware description language, such as Circom, and it will describe what the core operations and objects of this hardware description language are. And then, we'll also do a short tutorial, where we go over how you can implement a simple example of Sudoku inside this hardware description language. The next approach that we'll take or that we'll show is how to use a library that's implemented inside an existing high level language. In our case, it will be the artworks library, which is implemented in [INAUDIBLE],, so we'll describe some common operations and objects that are common to everything in this class of library-based approaches. And then, we'll also do a short tutorial which uses the [INAUDIBLE] library to illustrate what this looks like in practice. The final approach that we'll cover is, actually, a new language or the approach of describing a new language and implementing a compiler for it, which is intended to be oriented towards zero knowledge proving. So the language has constructs within it that correspond to operations that you would want to perform in your zero knowledge proof system. So we'll cover, at a high level, what such languages look like, and then, also, do a tutorial in one popular language called ZoKrates. Finally, we will conclude by doing an overview of various prominent ZKP tool chains, which fall into one of these three categories. And we'll try to do a compare and contrast of these, as well as an idea on how to unify all of these approaches as we move forward. OK, so before we start, maybe, let's quickly recall what is zero knowledge proof system does. A zero knowledge proof system is a way for approval to convince a verifier that some statement or predicate is true without revealing information about why it's true. [04:01] In more detail, a prover knows some predicate or claim file, a public input x and a private input w such that phi on x, w is satisfied. The verifier, in turn, only knows the predicate and x. The zero knowledge proof allows the prover to show that the predicate is satisfied, namely that fy phi x, w outputs 1 in a way that completely hides the private input w. OK, so this is nice in theory. But if you want to implement something, we have to know what phi can actually express, what kind of computations can be captured by this predicate phi. The nice thing is that, in theory, for many popular zero knowledge proof systems, phi can be any statement. So for example, you could use phi to prove the knowledge of the factorization of an integer. So your w, your private input, would be the factorization, and the public input would be the integer itself, and phi would just multiply the factorization and check that it equals the public input. You could use phi to show knowledge of private key for some public key, which is a public input. You could use it to show the password for an account, and you could show that you have a valid transaction. You could do basically whatever you might imagine. You can use phi to capture that. But all of this is in theory. What does phi actually look like when you try to implement it? So in practice, phi, in a format that the zero knowledge proof system understands, is going to be an arithmetic circuit over the public input x and the private input w. OK, so let's dive a little bit deeper into what an arithmetic circuit is. So in arithmetic circuit, you can think of it as similar to a Boolean circuit. You might be familiar with it from, say, your undergraduate classes. But you replace the Boolean gates, such as ANDs and ORs with arithmetic gates, such as additions and multiplications. [06:37] Furthermore, all this arithmetic is performed over what's called a prime field. You can think of this as the integer's modulo, some large prime p. So your addition and multiplication, they all happen modulo p. One example would be, p equals phi. Then, addition mod 5 looks like, if you want to add 4 and 5, you'll get 9. And then, mod 5, that is 4. Similarly, if you want to multiply 4 by 4 mod p, you will get 16 mod 5, which is just 1. OK, so basically, it's like a Boolean circuit, but all the operations, instead of being ANDs, and ORs, and so on, they instead become addition and multiplication modulo this prime p. All right. OK, so that is the background upon which these arithmetic circuits are defined. But how do you actually express any computation in these? So one way one way to view these arithmetic circuits is as a system of equations over the prime field. So for example, one such system would be, i multiply the first private input by itself three times, and I want to check that equals the public input x. And then, I do almost the same thing with the second private input. I just multiply it by itself. So I'm squaring the first one, the w one. And again, I want to check that it equals the public input. All right, you can basically express any polynomial over the field as arithmetic circuit. And I just talked about multiplications, but you can also throw in addition there. All right, so that's one way to view arithmetic circuits, right? But it's difficult to visualize what the circuit is computing in this way. Another way to view arithmetic circuits is as a directed acyclic graph or DAG. [08:53] Here, the nodes of this DAG would be things like the inputs to the circuit, the gate, such as addition, multiplication, equality testing, and some constants, which are input into these gates as well, right? So that would be the nodes. The edges of this graph are going to be wires, which carry values from one node to the next. So a wire from a multiplication gate into an addition gate will carry the output of the multiplication gate as an input into the addition gate. Let's see what this actually looks like by taking our example from the previous slide. So we want to express these two field equations as a DAG. For the first one-- rather for the second one, what we're going to do is we're going to multiply w1 by itself. So we're going to feed w1 into the multiplication gate twice. And then, we're going to take the output of that multiplication gate and feed it as an input into the equality gate. And similarly, we'll feed x the public input as an input to the equality gate also. And here, all of these arrows, they correspond to the wires of the DAG, right? So this is a subcircuit, which corresponds to the second equation. And the first equation, we can express in a similar way. As you can see, we are taking w0, feeding it into the multiplication gate, taking the output of that multiplication gate, and feeding it as input into another multiplication gate. And w0 is, again, fed as the other input into that multiplication gate. So the output of the second multiplication gate is going to be w0 times w0 times w0, so w0 cubed. And finally, we'll check that this w0 cubed is equal, again, to the public input by drawing a wire from x to the equality gate. All right, so this is one way to visualize these arithmetic [11:09] circuits. OK, so this is one format, which zero knowledge proof systems understand. On the next slide, Alex will cover another format, which is very popular for modern zero knowledge proving systems, and that is called R1CS or rank 1 constraint system. ALEX OZDEMIR: OK. Now, it's time for us to get into the details of one particular product representation used by a zero knowledge proof. We're going to be talking about the predicate representation called a rank 1 constraint system or R1CS. R1CS is not the only predicate format that's used with ZKPs, but it is the most common one. And historically, it's been the most important. The definition of R1CS is very simple. x is represented as L field element's, x1 through xl. w is represented as m minus l minus 1 field elements, w1 through wm minus l minus 1. And the predicate itself is just a set of n constraints or n equations, where every equation has the form alpha times beta equals gamma, where alpha, beta, and gamma are all affine combinations of variables. So you can think of this as a linear combination of variables, optionally, with a constant added. So let's look at a few examples of constraints that do and do not have this form. Our first example is w2 times w3 minus w2 minus 1 is equal to x1. This is a constraint that does have this form. Alpha is just w2. Beta is w3 minus w2 minus 1, and gamma is x1. So the most interesting of the affine combinations here is beta. It's a combination of w3, w2, and a constant. The coefficient for w3 is 1. The coefficient for w2 is minus 1, and the constant is minus 1. This is an acceptable constraint. Another acceptable constraint is w2 times w2 equals w2. One constraint that's unacceptable is w2 times w2 [13:18] equals x1. So this is unacceptable, essentially, because on the left hand side, you have three different variables, all being multiplied together. So you have two products of variables, and that means that however you view alpha and beta, one of alpha or beta is going to have a product of variables inside it, and that's not OK. Because alpha and beta each have to be affine combinations. However, if we wanted to take this constraint, we actually can encode it, using multiple rank 1 constraints, by introducing fresh intermediate variables. So we could say that w2 times w2 needs to be w4, or w4 is a new variable that we haven't used already. And then, we would say that w4 times w2 is equal to x1. So together, these constraints imply the constraint that we saw before. Indeed, if you eliminate w4, if you substitute w2 times w2 in for w4 in the second constraint, you get the original one. But what we've done here is we've just split that constraint into two in order to reduce the number of non-linear products per constraint. So this is how you can see rank 1 constraint systems, in terms of n constraints. But there's also another way of seeing them, an equivalent way of seeing them. That is, sometimes, useful. And this is the matrix definition of R1CS. The definition starts very similarly. You view x and w as vectors of field elements, but you define the predicate in a slightly different way. You say that the predicate is now defined by three matrices, A, B, and C, such that the predicate holds when if z is defined to be 1 concatenate with x, concatenate with w, Az, elementwise product with Bz is equal to Cz. So as Az, Bz, and Cz, those are three different matrix products. [15:07] And we're saying that the elementwise product for the first two matrix products should be equal to the third. If you draw this definition pictorially, you get something like this. I've got my matrix products Az times Bz n is equal to Cz. And the interesting thing about drawing it pictorially is that the correspondence between this definition in the rank 1 constraints becomes very clear. Because you see, when you take a matrix product, A times z, you take z, and you compute its inner product with every row of A. So what that means is that every row of A is essentially defining a linear combination or, more precisely, an affine combination of the variables in x and w. And so, if you look at a row in A, a row in B, and a row in C, then those three rows, they define a single rank 1 constraint. So the height of the matrices here, the height of A, B, and C is exactly n, the number of rank 1 constraints. And the width m is one more than the total number of variables. It's one more because the z vector includes this constant 1. So if this matrix definition is a bit hard for you to understand, that's all right. You can pause the video, take a look at it. But ultimately, when people program zero knowledge proofs, they usually don't think about the constraint system that they're building in terms of matrices. Usually, they just think about it in terms of rank 1 constraints, in terms of linear combinations. And so, we're going to get a little bit of practice, working with those linear combinations right now. And the way that we're going to get that practice is we're going to take this pictorial arithmetic circuit that I've drawn on the left, and we're going to turn it into a rank 1 constraint system. We're going to use a very simple non-optimal algorithm for doing this. [16:53] And this algorithm just has two steps. The first step is to introduce a new witness variable for every intermediate wire. So that means, since there are three intermediate variables, we're going to need three new witnesses, w2, w3, and w4. Now, in the second step, we write down a single rank 1 constraint for every gate. So each gate will have its own constraint will end up with four constraints. Our first constraint is going to be for the upper multiplication, and that constraint is just w0 times w1 equals w2. So in general, any multiplication, you can write down a constraint of this form. The first input times the second input equals the third input, and that constraint is rank 1 because there's only a single multiplication. Now, let's do the addition. For the addition, we're going to write this down as w3 equals w2, the first input plus x0, the second input. So here, this is a rank 1 constraint because w3 is our alpha combination. w2 plus x0 is our gamma combination, and our beta combination is just 1. So we've actually omitted it. We've left it implicit. The next multiplication, we handle like the first. w1 times x0 is equal to w4. And then, our final gate is this equality constraint, this equals. And we can just write that down. w3 equals w4. And once again, this is a rank 1 constraint because the beta linear combination is 1, just like it was for our addition gate. So this is a nice example. The algorithm that we've shown by example here generalizes immediately to any arithmetic circuit, and it produces one constraint per gate. So if we zoom out, at this point, you've learned about R1CS, rank 1 constraint systems, [18:44] a way of writing down a predicate so that you can write a zero knowledge proof about that predicate. And so, when we think about the problem that we have, our problem is going from high level ideas about the predicates that we want to be able to write zero knowledge proofs for, things like, I know the secret key for a public key. Things like, I know of a coin that's never been spent before. And you need to be able to take that high level idea and then turn it into a rank 1 constraint system. So this is pretty hard. In some sense, this is like trying to take the idea of a photo-sharing application and come up with assembly code that implements that application on your computer. The rank 1 constraint system, it's like assembly. And viewing the rank 1 constraint system assembly is useful because it turns out that the same kinds of tools that we use to turn high level programs into assembly are going to be useful for turning high level descriptions of predicates into rank 1 constraints. That is, we're going to be using libraries. We're going to be using compilers. We're going to using programming languages. We're going to be using domain specific languages. And in very briefly, in the rest of today's talk, we're going to-- or the rest of today's lecture, we're going to be going over different libraries, compilers, programming languages for this task. But to drive home this point even more, the idea is that we're going to start with some high level code. That high level code is going to include structures, such as Booleans, user-defined structures, modules, functions. We're going to feed this high level code into some kind of compiler or library. That library is going to spit out rank 1 constraints. And then, we can feed those rank 1 constraints into our zero [20:21] knowledge proof system. So we can produce a setup algorithm, prove algorithm, verify algorithm. Lots of basically every real deployment of zero knowledge proofs is built in exactly this manner. So to give you an example, the Zcash cryptocurrency is built like this. The high level-- the core of the Zcash cryptocurrency is this predicate that describes what it means to spend money anonymously. And the description of that predicate is a circuit that involves ideas, such as Merkle trees, Pedersen hashing signatures, and logic that describes when it is and is not OK to actually spend money. And so, the Zcash circuit is written down using a library called Bellman. And what Bellman produces on its output side is a set of rank 1 constraints. And then, those rank 1 constraints, in the case of the sampling distribution of Zcash, are fed into a zero knowledge proof system designed by Jens Gorth in 2016. The system is called Groth16. And then, Groth16 runs on the computer of everybody who uses Zcash. So that's one example of this pipeline in action. And today, we're not just going to illustrate this pipeline with the library. We're also going to illustrate it using other kinds of tools as well. So we're also going to look at a hardware description language, as well as a programming language and its compiler. And we're actually going to start with the hardware description language. Now, it's time for our first tutorial. I'll be telling you about how to use Circom, which is an HDL or a hardware description language for R1CS. [21:55] The tutorial is going to have two parts. We're going to start with slides. We're going to see the basic syntax and ideas of Circom And then, we're going to hop into a text editor and write some Circom code together. So let's start with the idea of Circom. The first thing to understand about Circom is that it is an HDL or a hardware description language, which is very different from APL or a programming language. You're probably used to using programming languages. You know that in a programming language, you have objects, such as variables. You can perform operations on them, and you can define functions and programs. The kinds of actions that you can take with these objects or the actions you're used to, you can mutate variables. You can evaluate operations. And you can call functions or run programs. But in HDL, the objects and the actions are very different. HDLs are all about describing circuits. So the basic objects are wires, gates, and circuits, or subcircuits. And then, the kinds of actions that you can do, you can't mutate things. You can't call functions. All you can do is connect wires, and you can create subcircuits, and then, perhaps, connect your wires to the wires of the subcircuits. HDLs are so different from PLs because they were originally designed for a very different purpose. HDLs are actually used to design digital circuits. So for example, the processor in your computer was designed using an HDL. In fact, it was probably designed using Verilog or SystemVerilog, which are the dominant HDLs. But it might have also, or components within it, may have been designed using something like VHDLS or Chisel, which are other HDLs. Generally speaking, VHDL differs from-- [23:37] SystemVerilog differs from Verilog and that SystemVerilog includes more features, as well as sort of tools for helping you verify that the circuit is correct. VHDL is more verbose and explicit than Verilog, and Chisel is higher level than Verilog. But Circom, it's not an HDL for digital circuits. It's an HDL for R1CS. And so, that means that the wires of Circoms, the signals, those are R1CS variables. And the gates that you create are rank 1 constraints. The final thing that I'll say about Circom before we dive into it is that, ultimately, every Circom circuit has two things that it needs to do for all of its signals. First of all, it needs to set a value for them. So it needs to set a variable, a value for every variable. And then, second of all, it needs to use to create rank 1 constraints. So let's look at a small Circom example. In this example, we're just going to be multiplying two field elements. The way that you create a template, the way you create a circuit in Circom is using the template keyword. So here, we say, template Multiply, and then we have the body of the template. Multiply, here, is the name. Inside our template, we start by declaring the inputs and outputs to our template. So a signal in Circom is a wire or an R1CS variable. And we have two input signals, x and y, and then, one output signal z. In Circom, the way that you set the value of a new variable or-- sorry-- a new signal, is using the left arrow operator. So the output signal z, that's created by this template. So we need to set a variable for it. We need to set a value for it. And we do that by saying that z, left arrow, x times y, or z gets x times y. So while this sets the value of z [25:30] and the value that an honest approver will assign, it doesn't create any rank 1 constraints. You create rank 1 constraint separately. So we're going to do that by saying that z triple equals x times y. And triple equals is the operator for creating rank 1 constraints, so there are some constraints associated with how you use it. Whenever you use triple equals, one side has to be a linear function of signals, and the other side has to be a quadratic function of signals, or a rank 1 constraint, or a quadratic expression, so the product of two linear combinations. So one example of using triple equals in an invalid way is this, saying that z triple equals x times x times y. On the right hand side here, we have a product of three variables, so this is not a rank 1 constraint. If you're interested in-- so in the above example, we both set z to be equal to x times y, and we also constrained z to be equal to x times y. And Circom, actually, has a special operator that allows you to do both of those. And the operator for this is a left arrow, where there are two lines instead of one. So instead of doing left angle dash, dash, you left angle equals, equals. So this looks visually like the combination of the signal assignment operation and the constraint creation operation. And it is actually just both those things. So this is shorthand for z gets x times y, and z is constrained to be equal to x times y. So, great. We've just created our first Circom template. However, Circom, ultimately, doesn't synthesize templates. It synthesizes main templates. So we have to tell Circom that this is our main template, and we do that by declaring the main component and setting it to be equal to multiply. [27:16] And whenever you create a main component in Circom, you have to tell Circom which signals are public and which are private. These correspond to the public data and the private data in your zero knowledge proof. The output is always-- if there is an output, it's always public. But the input is private unless you say otherwise. And so, here, we use Circom's syntax to say that x should be public. So with this main component, Circom is going to have the verifier know x, and then the verifier also knows z. This is a very simple-- that was a very simple example. Now, it's time for a more complex one. We're going to look at a slightly more complex template that's going to show off some of Circom's meta programming features. This template is going to check repeated swearing, so we're going to check that. If you start with x, you square it n times, then you get y. And so, the first thing that we see, in this example, is a template argument n. It's an argument to the template itself. The thing to remember about template arguments is that template arguments are fixed at compile time. So whenever we run the compiler, we're going to specify a value of n, saying that we want to generate a circuit that checks, for example, a thousand squarings. You can do a lot of things with these template arguments because they're known at compile time. One of the things that you can do is, you can declare an array of signals, whose length depends on the template argument. So here, we've created n plus 1 values in array, called xs of size n plus 1. And we've set the first element to this array to be equal to x. So this is one thing you can do. You can create these arrays, and then you [28:58] can access these arrays at constants. Another thing that you can do with template arguments is you can create for loops, whose bounds depend on template arguments. So here, we're creating a for loop. The iteration variable is i. It starts at zero, and it goes up to n, the template argument. And it does that in steps of 1. So this is an example of a loop in Circom. The loop can declare an iteration variable i. That iteration variable is going to be incremented at compile time. So when Circom processes this template, when it gets to this loop, it's actually going to process the body n different times. And it's important that, of course, that the bounds of the loop are things like template arguments or functions that depend on them because those bounds are also evaluated at compile time. So since our interest is in doing repeated squaring, in every iteration of this loop, we're going to do one squaring. So what we're going to do is we're going to access the next element of the array. And we're going to say that it needs to be equal to the square of the previous element. So that's what that line of code does. And then, after the loop, we need to set the output to be equal to the final element of the array because the final the element of the array now contains the result of doing n squarings. So we do that by saying that y gets and should be constrained to be equal to xs of n. And then, of course, we declare our main component. And now, since our main component is going to be the result of a template that takes a template argument, we need to actually provide that argument. So here, our main component is going to check a thousand squarings. OK, so this is a slightly more complex example, [30:39] and it shows off how you can use variables, how you can use template arguments, and how you can use loops in Circom. Now, I want to tell you about two additional features. I want to illustrate how witness computation or how signal assignment is more general than R1CS. And then, also, I want to show us sub-circuits. The example that we're going to use to get us started is the idea of creating a template that ensures its input is non-zero. So the input here is called n. And we want to guarantee that n is not equal to zero. We can't, of course, do this directly because rank 1 constraints assert equalities, not inequalities. But one way to check that a value is non-zero or to acquire a value be non-zero is to require that it has a multiplicative inverse, so to require that it actually has a reciprocal. And we can actually do that in a Circom. So we can say, OK, we want a signal called inverse, and we want inverse to be equal to 1 divided by n. And when you look at that expression, 1 divided by n, one of the things that you should notice that, that is not a rank 1 constraint, right? Division has no place in rank 1 constraints. But the left arrow in Circom, the gets operation, is more general than rank 1 constraints. In fact, you can put pretty much any expression on the right hand side of a gets operation. Because the gets operation is just setting the value of inverse. It's not trying to create rank 1 constraints. And then, in our non-zero circuit, on the next line, we can create the rank one constraint that corresponds to this gets operation. So that constraint is saying that one needs to be the product of n and signal. So this rank 1 constraint, of course, [32:18] is only satisfiable if is non-zero. Because if n is zero, then the right hand side of the constraint is always going to be zero, and the constraint is always going to be falsified. So this template really does ensure that the input is non-zero. And in order to write this template, we had to compute inverse separately from creating constraints over it. OK, so that's an example of how we can do witness computation. Now, I want to show how you can include one template inside of another. And so, we're going to do that by creating a tiny toy template that uses non-zero. So our toy template, we're going to call it Main, and it has two inputs, a and b. It creates a sub-circuit using the component keyword. So we create a new component called nz, which is going to be equal to the result of synthesizing the non-zero template. And then, on the next line, what we want to do is we want to connect our input a to the input of our sub-circuit. And so, we can refer to the signals of sub-circuits using dot notation. So nz dot n refers to the n signal inside the non-zero component or the non-zero template. Great. So we just set a, or we set the non-zero input to be a. And then, we also assert that a times b is equal to 0. So in some, since a is non-zero and a times b is equal to 0, this is just a roundabout way of saying, b equals 0. So, of course, if you actually wanted to require b to be 0, you would just say that. But doing it in this roundabout way allows us to show how you use sub-circuits. OK, great. So this has been our introduction to Circom in terms of slides. This is a very fast introduction to the syntax of Circom. [34:11] What we're going to do now is we're going to hop into a text editor, and we're going to write some Circom code together. The goal of the small example that we're going to program together is going to be to create a Sudoku-like game. So if you're not familiar with Sudoku, Sudoku is a puzzle, where there's a 9 by 9 grid. Some cells, initially, have numbers. On the left hand side, I have the puzzle. So you can see that some of the cells have numbers in them. Some of them don't. All the numbers, if there, are between 1 and 9. And your goal is to fill in all of the blanks with the numbers 1 through 9 so that no row has any duplicates, no column has any duplicates, and no 3 by 3 grid has any duplicates. So if you think about it, the solution to the puzzle is just a 9 by 9 grid of numbers that satisfies a few constraints. There are no duplicates in any row. There are no duplicates in any column. There are no duplicates in any 3 by 3 grid. And the numbers in your solution need to agree with the numbers in the original puzzle if there was a number in the particular cell of the original puzzle. So in the language of a zero knowledge proof, the puzzle here is the public information. It's the x. The solution is the witness. The predicate is all these constraints. And in our tutorial, we're actually not going to code up all of Sudoku. We're only going to enforce that every row has no duplicates, ensuring that no column has any duplicates, and that no 3 by 3 grid has any duplicates. It's very similar. But to keep the tutorial short, we're just going to do rows for now. OK, great. [35:45] Now, we'll cut into the text editor. OK, welcome back. So now, we're going to hop into a text editor and work through writing a small Circom program together. I'm doing this from the starter code in the zero knowledge examples repository that you should have access to. So in my starting point, I've got this file, sudoku.circom that we're going to be editing. You can, of course, do this with whatever text editor you like. So here's the file. And so, what we're going to do in this file is we're going to create a sequence of templates, ultimately building a template that checks a solution to Sudoku or, at least, that checks that you respect the row constraints of Sudoku. And we're going to do this piece by piece. So the first template that we're going to create is called non-equal. And so, what this template should do is ensure that n0 and n1 are not equal to one another. And the way that we're going to do that is we're going to check that n0 minus n1 is non-zero. And we actually saw earlier the tool for checking if something is non-zero, which is that we need to verify that an inverse exists. So we're going to declare a new signal. We're going to call this signal inverse, and we are going to set inverse to be equal to 1 divided by in n0 minus n1. But, of course, we also have to ensure that constraint is respected. And so, we can do that by enforcing that inverse times n0 minus n1 is equal to 1. Great. So that's our first template. Now, onto our next template. This template is called distinct. It takes an argument n, and its inputs-- or its input is an array of different signals, and what it ensures is that each pair of signals in this array [37:56] are not equal to one another, which ensures that every single element is unique. So all elements are unique in the array. And we're going to do that by creating a bunch of components. So what we're basically going to do is just for every-- we're going to just very naively for every pair of inputs, we're going to create a component that ensures that those two pairs or that pair, those two elements, are not equal to one another. And so, we're going to do that using a for loop. So we're to say, OK, first of all, let's have i, which is going to go up to n. And then, inside this, we're going to do another for loop in j. And what j is going to do is it's just going to go up to i. Great. And so, for every pair-- so ij is now a pair of indices into this array. And for every pair, we want to create a non-zero sub-circuit, and we want to wire it up to this pair of inputs. So we create the component by setting non-equal i j to be equal to a non-equal template instantiation. And then, we have to connect the inputs to this non-equal component. And so, we'll set n0 to be our input at location i. And we'll set n1 to be our input at location j. And notice that I actually just made an error. So here, I'm creating a component. And I can actually use the equal sign for that. That's the right syntax for creating a component. But here, I'm trying to connect to wires. And you'll remember that the way that we connect wires, both doing assignment and constraining, is we use this left arrow with equal signs. So this is the gets, and assign, and constrains operator. Great. So now, we have something that we can use to check that n different values are distinct. This will be important for checking [40:15] that our rows are distinct. But what other constraints do we have? Well, in Sudoku, we know that all the numbers have to be in the range 1 to 9. And it actually turns out that checking that a value is in a range in Circom is quite painful. It's quite challenging. And so, I've actually done it in advance. We're not going to walk through it together right now. I will say, the structure that we use to do it, which is that we start by creating this template called Bits4, that essentially just checks that n fits in 4 bits more precisely. It ensures that n is in the range 0 through 15. And it turns out that this is not so hard to do because that range has width, which is the power of 2. And so, what you can do is you can just provide the bit decomposition. That's this array of signals here. And then, you can check that every element is zero, and you can build this bit sum that essentially ensures that those bits, when you sum them up with powers of 2, give you the input. And then, ultimately, this ensures that n is in this range 0 to 15. And then, to ensure that n is in a range 1 to 9, inclusive on both sides, it suffices to check that n minus 1 is in the range 0 to 15 and to check n plus 6 is in the range 0 to 15. So that's how we ultimately build this template 1 to 9. But now, let's actually get into the Sudoku puzzle itself. So how does this puzzle work? Well, OK, we've got the solution. It's just going to be a 2D array of numbers. We want to ensure that all those numbers are 1 to 9. And then, we've got the puzzle. It's going to be a 2D array of numbers. But now, there can be some zeros, and those zeros represent blanks. [41:58] So what should we do first? Well, how about we start by just ensuring that everything is in the range 1 to 9. So we're going to need a for loop. So we're going to do 4i equals 0, i less than n, i plus plus-- Oh, I guess I didn't say, but n here is going to be the dimension of the puzzle. So really, we're only going to care about n equals 9. But by making n a variable, perhaps, we could use this part of the code in the future to ensure that, for example, a 6 by 6 Sudoku puzzle is solved quickly. So we've got this double for loop, and this double for loop is just going over the two dimensions of the puzzle. And what we want to do is ensure that every value is in the range 1 to 9. So I'm going to need an array of components. So component inRange n n. It's a two-dimensional array because we want to have one component for every cell of the puzzle. And so, now, what I'll do is, I'll set in range i j to be equal to be equal to a 1 to 9 template. And then, I need to connect the input. So I'm going to set the n for this component to be both equal to and constrained to be equal to our solution at location i j. Great. So the whole point of all of this-- and it's always good to write comments-- is to ensure that each solution cell or each solution number is in range. And this code does that. And so, actually, one thing that we should be able to do right away is test that a candidate solution is valid. Of course, we're not done. We still need to check that the values inside different rows are unique and also that the solution agrees with the puzzle. But it's good to test your code as you go. [44:13] And already, this is something that we can test. Because if our solution is valid, then all the values should be in range. OK, so what is the next thing that we want to do? Well, perhaps, now, what we should do is, we should ensure that the puzzle and the solution agree. And so, what I mean by that is that, in every location, either the puzzle should be 0 or the puzzle and the solution should be equal. The reason that it's or is that if the puzzle is zero, it's blank. And so, well, anything in the solution will agree with a blank in the puzzle. But if the puzzle has a non-zero value, then it's important that there's agreement. So this is also going to be a two-dimensional for loop. So we'll go ahead and copy that from our previous loop. And how are we going to-- how are we going to do this? Well, it turns out, it's a very nice way. It suffices to say that the puzzle cell times the puzzle cell minus the solution cell is zero. If the puzzle cell is zero, this is satisfied immediately. Because the left hand side of the product is zero but if the puzzle sell is non-zero, then the right side has to be zero, i.e. puzzle cell minus solution cell has to be zero, i.e. they have to be equal. And so, we'll just go ahead and write that constraint. So we'll say that the puzzle at location i j times the puzzle at location i j minus the solution at location i j needs to be equal to zero. Great. So we're making some progress. And now, what we have to do is check that every row has, at most, one copy of every number. So we need to use that distinctness thing from earlier. And so, once again, a 2D array seems useful. So our goal now is to ensure uniqueness in rows. Great. [47:03] And so, to ensure uniqueness in rows, we're going to need some distinct components. So let's declare an array component distinct of length n. So, let's see. So here, j will be our iterator for different row numbers. And so, i will be our iterator for different row numbers, and j will be our variable for different column numbers. And so, if we want to ensure uniqueness in each row, for every row, we need a new component. So here, we're going to say that distinct i is equal to a distinct template instantiation. And then, j, now, is going to be the different column indices. And so, what we want to do here is we want to say that the distinct components input, in particular, j input is going to be equal to our solution that location i j. So we're taking our cell, and we're connecting it to connecting it to our component. Good. And then, at the end, we have our main declaration. Our main component is a Sudoku circuit with template parameter 9. And the puzzle is public. And of course, the solution is not public. So, great. We've just done that. And so, now, I'm going to go out into the main file. Sorry, I'm back in my terminal. And actually, what we've done is we've written a Makefile for you. So I'll just print it out right now. Here's our makefile. Or maybe, I should-- and basically, what it does is it just runs all the different steps of the Circom compiler and the proof itself in order. And so, the first thing that we're going to do, actually, is we're s going to run the Circom compiler. And so, we can run the Circom compiler just to check our code by running Circom and then passing [49:37] it the file. And it's going to run. It's going to tell us that we have an error. And our error is, apparently, on line 37. We had some unrecognized token and ending curly brace, when we should have had something else. So let's go ahead and open our file and go to line 67. So we're now in line 67. And we're going to see why this curly brace was unexpected. And I bet this curly brace is unexpected because we forgot a semicolon on the line before. So we've added that semicolon. And now, we're going to run our compiler again. And it's saying, OK, so you've created this component called distinct, using-- or you've invoked this distinct template, and you gave zero parameters, but one parameter was expected. So I can bet I know what's going on there. I bet that distinct takes an argument for the size of the array, and it should be that argument should be 9, or it should be n, but we didn't give one. So we're going to go do that. So let's go down to the bottom, find that distinct component. Here it is. And we're going to set the argument to be n. Good. So we've found two syntax errors. And now, OK, great. So now, it's telling us that we're OK. So let's go ahead, and let's run the makefile. And that's just going to go ahead. It's going to do a lot of things. It's going to have to run the setup algorithm for the zero knowledge proof, which actually takes a while, after all this time. Right now, it's doing. And it's going to go ahead and write our proof, and it's going to go ahead and verify it. And you can actually see the makefile printing [51:16] out the commands that it runs. So let's see. Let's go-- well, I guess, we'll look at the-- reading make it hard. So first of all, we run this powersoftau ceremony. Earlier, the compiler outputted the Sudoku, the R1CS file that represents the R1CS itself. So we do set up with the R1CS. And then, we run our proving. And then, we run our verification. So if you want-- if you're interested in the details of the steps that you have to run to compile your circuit, and then, later, to create the zero knowledge proof, they're actually a little bit intricate. You can find them in the makefile in the starter code. But for now, for our purposes, this is the end of the tutorial. We successfully made a circuit that checked part of a Sudoku puzzle. PRATYUSH MISHRA: OK. Prtayush here again. So now, we're going to cover the second approach for programming constrained systems, and in particular, R1CS. And that is the so-called library approach. So to recap on Circom, this hardware description language for specifying on R1CS. And a key feature of Circom is that you get a direct control over constraints. However, it's a custom language, and this can be good or bad, depending on how well designed the HDL is and how easy to use it is. OK. A different approach to programming ZKPs, which gives you the same very direct control over constraint systems, is to use a library. So in this approach, you define a library, which is implemented in some host language, which is usually a popular high level programming language, [53:04] such as Rust, OCaml, C++, Go, and so on, right? In all of the libraries that implement this approach, there is one key type, and that is a constraint system. So this constraint system object is responsible for maintaining state about the R1CS constraint system as you build it up, and the variables, and values assigned to the variables, as you're doing the constraint system generation. A little bit more detail. The constraint system internally contains the representation of the three constraint matrices A, B, and C, as well as the values that are assigned to the variables, if there's any values assigned. The key operations that you can perform on this constraint system object are creating a new variable, which basically involves appending a new entry into this list of variables, creating a linear combination of variables, which corresponds to, for example, five variable 1 plus two variable 3 plus 3 variable 4, and so on, and so forth. So basically, any arbitrary linear combination of the variables in this list. Finally, you can add a constraint, which adds a new entry into each of these three matrices. Let's see what this actually looks like in pseudo Rust. OK, for variable creation, you will have an add_var function or method, which takes as input the constraint system so that it can mutate it and add a new entry. The visibility of the variable, whether it's public or private, a value that's assigned to the variable in case you are doing proving. And the result is a variable ID, which is an identifier or a handle on the variable, which can be used later on, for example, in linear combination creation, as well as in constraint generation. OK, so in the process of-- when you call cs.add_var, a new entry is added into the variables list, which consists of the tuple ID p, v. So it contains the variable handle, the visibility, and the value. OK, once you have a bunch of variables that you've gotten [55:50] by calling cs.add_var, you can construct so-called linear combinations. This is, basically, as I said, a list consisting of coefficient comma handled pairs, right? So this looks like, as you can use cs.0 to create an empty linear combination, which contains nothing. And then, once you have this empty linear combination, you can add a term to it by giving the coefficient C, as well as the variable handle ID as input, and then you'll get the modified lc, represented here as lc prime. And that contains the original terms of the lc plus an additional tone, which corresponds to c times id. So for example, if your original linear combination contained 5, v1, and you and you call lc.add 2, V2, then your new lc prime will contain 5, v1 and 2, v2. All right. So it's basically just appending this pair of coefficient, variable handle to the linear combination list. Finally, the most important operation in a constrained system object is to, as we said, add constraints, right? And this happens via this API cs.constrain, which takes in three linear combinations corresponding to the three matrices and adds a constraint which enforces that the lcA times lcB equals lcC once you substitute the values of the variables in place of their handles. So these lc A, B, C are added to the A, B, and C matrices, respectively. So this is quite a high level description. Let's see what it actually looks like when you're trying to implement a common operation. And we'll take the example of performing a Boolean and. So we'll define a new Rust function, which takes as input the constraint system, a variable representing the first input to the end and another variable B, representing the second input at the end. [58:17] What we will do is we will construct a new variable result, which is a witness variable. So this is just shorthand for passing in the private visibility into the new var method. And the value that's assigned to this variable is the value of a and the value of b. So we just do the logical and between and B. s And that should be the value that's assigned to the result. So we've created a new variable. But now, we have to enforce that it's actually correct, that it actually satisfies the constraint, that, namely, it is the end of a and b. To do this, we will first construct some linear combinations, and this is via the stressed macro, which returns shorthand for returning an empty linear combination. So we will create a linear combination containing just the term a, one containing just the term b, and the final one, which contains the result. Finally, to enforce our end constraint, we will pass these three linear combinations into the enforced constraint or constraint method. And this will enforce that a times b equals result. So the reason why this is correct is, if a has value of 0 or 1, or b has value of 0 or 1, then the end of these corresponds basically exactly to the multiplication of these variables seen as field elements, right? So think about it. If a is 0, b is 0, then 0 times 0 is still 0. And then, this corresponds exactly to the end . So the result must have also value 0. And if you enumerate the other cases, you'll see that it all works out. In the end, we return the result variable and get our result as needed, all right? OK, so this is not too complex, but it's a lot of boilerplate that you might not want to repeat every time. It can get tedious and error prone. And writing any complex algorithm, [60:40] say, such as signature verification, in this style, would be quite a pain. So instead of programming our computations or programs just by enforcing manually the enforced constraint, and new variable declaration, and so on, we, instead, want to leverage the power of the host language Rust, for example, to be able to abstract away these low level operations, right? So because our host language provides abstractions, such as structs, operator overloading methods, and many more, we should use these to allow better developer UX. And here, we can see one example of that. What we'll do is we will wrap our variable in a dedicated type. So we'll have a Boolean struct. And then, we will use the operator overloading feature of Rust to allow, in the future, just doing, literally writing, a ampersand b. Then, we want to compute the end of two Boolean variables. So we would put the same logic as what is on the previous slide inside the function body. But once we've done this, now, we can use high level syntax. So does this approach actually work? So, yes, we can declare our variables very nicely. We just say it's a new witness, or a new witness, or whatever, right? So we give a and b true and false. And then, we can enforce that the result of a and b equals false. We have this very simple line, right? So now, we don't have to have manual calls to constrain and new variable and manual lc generation. We can just write a & b. So there's many different gadget libraries. Not all of them use this approach to the full extent. They don't all try to use the language abstractions, but many of them do. OK, so that's nice from the abstraction perspective. But what about the expressiveness [62:59] of the language in terms of enabling witness computation? Now, the good thing is that because we are embedded in a host language, which is a general purpose language, we can leverage that power to perform arbitrary computations to actually compute and generate our witnesses, right? So for example, instead of just providing true, we can actually say that the value of this a witness variable is some random expression. In this case, 4 equals equals 5, which is going to be false, and x less than y-- x and y are some other variables or some other native host variables, right? So you can imagine putting whatever logic you want inside this. And the good thing is that this logic is executed only when needed, only during proving, and not during, say, setup, when the value or the variable assignments might not even exist, right? So we're not going to-- If it's an expensive computation, we're not going to execute it unless it's needed. All right. So this was a high level overview. Let's now dive into a tutorial on how we can use this approach concretely with one specific constraint programming library, which is in the Artworks ecosystem. OK, so now, let's dive into how we can implement our Sudoku checker using the Artworks R1CS constraint libraries. In particular, we'll make use of the Artworks R1CS standard libraries, which contain constrained versions of many popular primitives, such as integers, Booleans, equality, comparison, and so on. So first, we have to define our puzzle and solution types. And here, we are able to use Rust's type system. And in particular, we're able to define a puzzle, which is generic over the size, so any n by n matrix works. And also, generic over the underlying constraint field. We're not limited to a particular finite field. [65:15] We can make it work with any finite field that we want to instantiate later. But anyway, the type that we want to put in here is, basically, an array of arrays. And the element of the array is going to be n by n array of arrays. And the same thing goes for the solution. What we have to do, those we have to additionally specify the constraint field in here and the same thing here. So now, puzzle and solution are both generic over the constraint field type. So any constraint field will suffice. OK, so we're going to reprise the strategy that we had in the second example. And what we're going to do is, we're going to perform two checks. First, we have to check that each row contains only unique entries. There's no repeated entry in every row. And then, we have to check that the puzzle matches the solution. And what this means is that we have to check that the solutions entries are within the particular range of 1 through 9, and that they match the entries in the puzzle. So let's take each task one by one, starting with the row checker. So what we'll do in this is we'll iterate over each row. All right. And again, here, we're using Rust's iteration syntax. And then, we're going to iterate over the entries in each row. And basically, the syntax says, for the j-th element, which is cell, we're basically able to obtain this using rust iterator infrastructure. So what we're going to do now is that we have an iterator over each cell in a Row. What we have to show is that this cell is not equal to any of the prior cells in that row. So we can do this by performing another iteration over the prior entries in the row. [67:23] And to get this list of prior entries, we're going to be using Rust's slicing syntax. What basically this says is give me the entries in row, starting from 0 and up to, but not including j. So now, we have the cell in every prior cell. And what we need to do is check for inequality. So we need to check whether this is not equal to the prior cell with the current cell is not equal to the prior cell. And then, we need to enforce that this is true, that the current sell is not equal to the prior cell. So we should enforce that condition is true. So this is all that we need to actually specify our example here, in particular to just check the rules are correct. So now, we can move on to the next part of the solution, which is checking the puzzle matches the solution. All right, so we'll set this up in a similar way. We'll iterate over the rows and columns of the puzzle and solution. But thanks to Rust's iterator syntax, we're able to iterate over both the puzzle rows and the solution rows at the same time as follows. So what we're going to do is we're going to, first, iterate over the puzzles, the rows. And we're going to zip that with the rows of the solution. And similarly, we're going to now iterate over the entries in each of these rows at the same time, using, again, the iterator. OK, so we have this. Now, we have an iterator over every so the corresponding entries in the puzzle and the solution. And the first thing we want to do is, we need to ensure that the solution, this s, is in the correct range, say, 1 through n, inclusive, right? In this case, normal Sudoku, n would be 9. So the range would be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. OK, so we're going to do here is we're going to, first, get a Boolean, indicating whether the solution's entry is [70:08] less than n or less than or equal to n. So this is one side of the condition. The other side of the condition is that it is greater than or equal to the constant 1, right? And so, of these question marks are just some rest syntax. And now, we need to enforce that the end of these two actually equals true. This is slightly more verbose than using, say, Circom or the next one that we'll see, which is ZoKrates. But it's still pretty readable. And we can also try to leverage. Yeah, we can try to leverage Rust's railroading better here. R1CS doesn't fully implement that yet. All right, so now, we've ensured that the solutions entry is within the appropriate range, what we need to do next is ensure that the solution entry matches the puzzle entry. So we need to ensure that either the puzzle slot is zero, which means that it's something that can be filled in by the solver, or that the slot matches the equivalent slot in the solution. So the solutions slot, if it says 1, then it must be the same entry in the puzzle, must also be 1. And we'll enforce this by, first, checking that either the puzzle entry is equal to the solution entry. Or if that's not the case, then we have to ensure that the puzzle entry is 0, right? So now, we have this or, which represents the whole condition, and we need to enforce that this is true. OK, so now, we've enforced that the solution is in the correct range, and that it matches the puzzle. OK, all we need to do is return OK to indicate that the puzzle that the function completed successfully without any errors. And we will do the same thing here as well. OK, so we have an additional check helper function that's already written for us. What it basically does is it creates a new constraint system and allocates new variables for the puzzle and solution. [73:08] For the puzzle, it says it's a public input. For the solution, it says it's a witness. And then, we call these two methods that we just defined puzzle match solution and the check rows. Finally, we check or we assert that their constraint system is satisfied. All right, this is basically just a helper function because we're going to be having two kinds of tests in our main. So for the first test, we want to check that our solution, that the code that we've written actually accepts valid solutions. So in this case, we will define the puzzle to be 1, 0, 0, 2. And a valid solution to this puzzle would be 1, 2, 1, 2. The entries of the rows are distinct. There's no repetition. And yeah, the entries of the solution match the entries of the puzzle when necessary. So we expect this check to pass. And let's try to see if that's the case. Right after going over the next check, which is to check that it rejects incorrect solutions, we'll come to this in just a second. Let me just comment it out so that we can get the compiler running. So let's create a new terminal. And here, let's do cargo run. We forgot to save. And we have a slight bug. We forgot some syntax here. So this should be in. And let me save and run again. We should have everything compiling. And we'll see that this assertion passes. It does not lead to an error, which means that our code accepts a valid solutions. Now, let's comment out the invalid solution. And now, our assertion should fail again. Let's try cargo running again. And we'll see that it is unsatisfied [75:14] because the solution is invalid. In particular, it contains a zero entry, right? So the entries of the solution should be in the range 1 or 2. So that wraps it up. You can use the Artwork's interface to use these constraint systems with any R1CS accepting [INAUDIBLE] such as [INAUDIBLE] and [INAUDIBLE] many others, right? And I won't go into that here, but it's very easy to plug this constraint system into those [INAUDIBLE].. So after seeing that example of how to program the Sudoku checker in ZoKrates, let's now take a look at our next programming framework, and that is compiling a high level ZKP-specific language to R1CS. We start by doing a quick recap of the previous two approaches, and this will serve as a starting point for the rest of this section. So HDL and circuit libraries do have their differences, one being that circuit libraries use their host language, which can be a full-featured programming language. Whereas, HDLs are limited to whatever custom language that they have specified, right? But despite this difference, there are actually, in terms of the core operations you do, there are similarities. Namely, in both approaches, we have to explicitly create wires or variables and then explicitly write down constraints, which enforce some conditions on these variables. And this is despite the fact that we might be able to leverage the abstractions of our languages, right? So for example, in Circom, we could use templates. In Artworks, we could use the Rust programming language features. However, at the end of the day, somebody, somewhere, has to write down code, which explicitly creates variables And explicitly constrains them. So the question we should ask ourselves now is, whether we are limited to this paradigm. [77:31] And thankfully for us, the answer is no. There is a more ergonomic way, and that is to design and specify a high level language, which has the niceties of something like Rust, but doesn't require us to explicitly program R1CS or reason about individual variables. So we would specify-- we would write down a program in this high level language, making use of nice features, such as functions, for loops, variables, arrays, struct, and so on. Then, we would throw this at a compiler, whose task would be to take this representation, this textual representation, and spit out our R1CS, which consists of the familiar wires, and constraints, and variables, and so on. So this is a high level idea. And let's take a look at how this manifests in one of the most popular ZK programming languages called ZoKrates. So ZoKrates supports many popular features of languages, such as custom types. You can define a custom type as a struct or as a type alias, right? And then, every ZoKrates program has a main entry point called the main function. And inside this function and subsequent other functions, we can define new variables, which have values that are used during execution or proving. We can annotate the inputs to the main function in terms of their visibility. So in this case, this function of this variable x is public and is known to the verifier. And finally, we can enforce specific constraints on these variables via the assert keyword. Note that this is different from the constrain method that we saw in the Artworks approach. Here, assert can take any Boolean expression as input. It does not need to take a linear combination. So it is input, but can take any Boolean expression. In this case, it's checking that x equals y 0 times y1, [79:37] but you could put whatever you wanted, as long as it evaluates to true or false. OK, so this is a high level syntax. In a little bit more detail, ZoKrates supports a lot of advanced features, such as integer generic type parameters to function. This basically says that this repeated squaring function is generic over some integer argument. We can specify arrays that can be mutated. For example, in for loops, that have some fixed compile time known length. And we can have if expressions, as well as compile time known array accesses. So the index into an array must be known at compile time. OK, so put together, all of these features allow us to have a very rich programming environment and write quite high level code. So this is nice from a UX perspective, but what about expressivity? Do we take a hit here? And the answer is, unfortunately, yes, particularly from the perspective of witness computation. In more detail, there is no way in ZoKrates to compute a witness during the execution of a program. And instead, all witnesses or private inputs must be provided as arguments to the main function, right? So this main function, which is the entry point into a ZoKrates program, the arguments to that main function are the only places where we can specify private inputs. So we cannot declare a private variable during the execution, even of main. It must be declared at this point. All right. OK, so how do these pros and cons play out in practice? To investigate that, let's take a look at our next tutorial, which will be the pseudocode checker in ZoKrates. OK, so let's get started. Our task, as we know, is to implement the Sudoku checker [81:51] in this high level language, called ZoKrates, right? So we'll start, as in the Artworks example, by defining our custom puzzle and solution types. And just like Rust, ZoKrates also supports integer generics as we saw, right? So like in the Artworks example, we're going to define our puzzle as a multi-dimensional array, two-dimensional array, in this case. So it's an array of arrays, and each array is of size n. So this works for the puzzle and for the solution, all right? And again, now, our strategy for implementing our constraints is going to be the same as before. We're going to check that each row is unique, and we're going to check then that the puzzle matches the solution, and, furthermore, that the entries of the solution are within the required range. All right, so let's get started with our checkers function. So we're going to iterate over each row. So for u32 i in 0..N. So in the range 0 to N, including N minus 1. And then for each entry in each row, we're going to do for u 32 j and 0..N. And now, what we're going to do, as before, is check that the i, j element is not equal to any of the previous elements in that row. So to do this, we will instantiate yet another for loop. But the range of this for loop is going to be up to j. So it'll be 0, 1, 2, 3, including j minus 1. Those will be the values of k. And so, what we need to do is assert that the jth element of the solution is not equal to-- is not equal to any of the previous elements in that row, OK? All right, so here, we're able to use to access the inner element of sol via this dot syntax. We're able to use array indexing, and we have for loops for iterating over the compile time fixed range. An interesting thing to note here [84:40] is that this innermost loop on the face of it, it looks like it has a variable number of iterations because j takes varying values. But the ZoKrates compiler is able to figure out that, actually, the number of iterations of the number of-- sorry, the value of j in a particular iteration is going to be fixed, right? So say, j equals 0 in the first iteration, then the range of this for loop will be from 0 to 0. So the for loop will not execute if j equals 1 in the next iteration. Then, this inner for loop will go from 0 to 1, so the value of k will be 0, and so on, and so forth. So basically, each time the initial iteration, where, basically, the length of this loop is fixed. All right, OK, so at the end, we will return true just to indicate that our function completed successfully. OK, so that's it. That's all we need to do to check uniqueness. It's very similar to the Artworks code, but it looks a bit more readable because we're able to use these native operators, such as not equals, and so on. OK, so that's that. Now, let's move on to the next step, which is to check that the puzzle matches the solution, and the solution entries are in the correct range. So we'll follow the same strategy. We'll iterate in 0..N. And so, we'll iterate over the rows and over each entry in each row. And we're going to assert two things. First, that the elements are in the correct range. All right, so they're greater than zero. And they are less than-- so let's say, in this case, we only support Sudoku numbers, so this is going to be less than 10, OK? This is the first assertion. The second assertion is going to ensure that the puzzle matches the solution. [86:58] So we'll, again, have the same strategy as in the Artworks case. We have to assert that either this entry of the puzzle is zero, which is an empty slot and can be filled with anything. Or if that's not the case, then it must equal the corresponding entry in the solution. Yeah, if it is zero, then it can be filled in with whatever value, and we don't care about the value of the solution, as long as it satisfies the check row function. But if it is not zero-- the entry in the puzzle is not zero, then it must equal the corresponding entry in the solution, and that's exactly what we're checking. OK, so then, as before, we will return true to indicate that the function completed executing correctly. All right. And so, our main entry point for the function or for the program, in general, is going to be this main method. And it's going to take in public input, which is the puzzle-- this is known to the verifier-- and a private solution, which is known only to the approver. And then, we'll pass these into the check rows and check puzzle natural solution functions. OK, so this looks nice. Let's to try it out. And we're going to open up a new terminal window. So ZoKrates has a few different commands that you can execute to be able to generate a proof. The first is to actually compile our program into our R1CS. So we're going to invoke the compile command with input, the name of the file. So we have a compile time error, and it seems like we forgot to put a semicolon in our code. This is a very common problem for anybody's program C, or C++, or Rust. Anyway, so once we fix that, we can see that it compiles, [89:04] and it requires a relatively large number of constraints, even for a 2 by 2 matrix that requires 3,000 constraints. But no matter. It's still quite small in the larger scheme of things. So the next step is to invoke the setup command to be able to generate a set of public parameters that we can use to test our code. So we should not use this in production. Instead, you want to use something like powers of tower type, setup ceremony, multi-party computation based ceremony. OK, so here, we're going to perform the setup, and it's going to be for the default ZKP, which is Groth16. All right, so we've done the setup. And as you can see, it's using the Gorth16 scheme. And there are some warnings here about malleability. We don't have to care about that for this example. The verification key and proving key have been written to these files, and the setup is now complete. All right, the next step is to compute the witnesses that we will use during proving, OK? And to do this, we have to provide the concrete instance of the puzzle, as well as the solution. So the way to do this is-- there's a variety of ways to do this. You can read them from a file. You can read them from different file formats, in fact. But what we're going to do here is we're going to pass the puzzle and solution as input on the command line. And we're going to do this by of ordering our puzzle and solution in row major order. So this 1, 0, 0, 2 is going to be the puzzle. It means the first row is 1, 0. The second row is 0, 2. And then, we're going to pass in our solution, which is going to be 1, 2, 1, 2. So it's very similar to the Artworks example. [90:59] All right, so ZoKrates computes a witness. And basically, this involves generating the values for any intermediate variables that are generated in the R1CS constraints. So all those values are written into this witness file, and then we can invoke the generate proof command, which will take this witness file. We'll take the proving key and spit out zero knowledge proof, which is improved on JSON, which we can then verify using the ZoKrates verifier. And as we'll see, the verification passed. We can try to pass, as before, an incorrect witness, right? But as we'll see here, ZoKrates tries to plug-in these values into the execution. It will fail. In particular, the check that we expect to fail is going to be the real uniqueness check. And indeed, we'll see the assertion failed at line 17 and says exactly where we're having the failure, right? So that wraps up ZoKrates. And now, I'll hand things back to Alex for the rest of the lecture. ALEX OZDEMIR: Welcome back. At this point, we've gone through three tutorials. You've seen how to use Circom, how to use Artworks, and how to use ZoKrates. And now, we're going to take a few minutes at the end of the lecture to synthesize. We're going to think about differences and similarities between these different tools and the benefits and costs of using them. The three different kinds of tools that we saw were, first, hardware description languages, which are languages, stand alone languages, for describing circuit synthesis. Second, we saw circuit synthesis libraries. And third, we saw a programming language, ZoKrates, and a compiler that turns it into a circuit. In understanding these three different classes of tools, HDLs, libraries, and PLs, I think [92:58] it's useful to view them as differing in two different ways. The first axis of difference is the type of the language, whether the language is fundamentally about describing circuit synthesis or whether it's about describing a program. So that's the vertical axis here, circuit versus program. The horizontal axis is whether or not the language has its own syntax, whether it is a standalone language. If yes, then the language has its own compiler parser and so on. And if no, the language is embedded inside some host. So a circuit synthesis library is an example of an embedded language for describing circuit synthesis. Artworks is like this. It's embedded inside the syntax of Rust, and it produces-- it describes explicitly how to synthesize a circuit. On the other hand, Circom is also about synthesizing a circuit, but it has its own syntax, so it's a standalone language. And then, finally, ZoKrates or, in general, programming languages, they're about describing a program, and they have their own syntax. And then, they have a compiler that interprets that consumes the syntax and produces a circuit that has the same meaning as the program. So this is one useful way to see these three different kinds of tools in terms of the kind of thing they describe, circuit versus program, and in terms of whether they have their own syntax. But another useful way to understand these different tools is in terms of the benefits and costs of using them, the pros and cons. And so, right now, we'll talk about some of the pros and cons of using Circom, Artworks, and ZoKrates. Let's start with Circom. The pros of using circumflex is that it has an elegant syntax, [94:44] and it's very clear what the constraints are. You have direct control over them. Whenever you want to create a constraint, you use this triple equality or, perhaps, you use the double stroke arrow. The con of using Circom is that it's hard to learn, at least, for most people who come from a computer science background. Because it's not really a programming language. It's a hardware description language. And the even bigger con is that Circom has very limited tools for creating good abstractions. There's no notion of user-defined structure. In fact, the only kind of abstraction that you can create is the abstraction of a sub-circuit. There are no types. There's just signals and arrays of signals. So if you want to create something like a Boolean, there really isn't good tooling for doing that. Now, let's talk about Artworks, the pro of using Artwork. The pros of using artworks is, essentially, that it preserves the clear description of constraints that Circom has, but it gives you all the expressiveness of a language like Rust. And in general, whenever you're using a circuit synthesis library, you have all the expressiveness of the language that the library is written in. The con is, of course, that you need to know that language, so you need to know Rust or whatever other language the library is written in. And the library, well, it just synthesizes a circuit. It doesn't really do much optimization for you, so it's up to you to optimize. You really need to hand tune and get all of the constraints to be as few in number as possible. The final class of tools that we looked at is the class of programming languages. We look specifically at ZoKrates. The pro of using a programming language is that, out of all the options, by far, the easiest to learn. [96:26] Because the semantics of a programming language, those are the kinds of semantics that we're used to. There are variables. There are functions. These are things that we're familiar with. Programming languages can also have very, very elegant syntax because they get to design the syntax themselves. They're not stuck to whatever Rust or whatever the host language is using. The con, though, of using one of these programming languages is that you have to give up some control. And so, we saw an example of this with ZoKrates. ZoKrates doesn't allow you to describe explicitly how to compute intermediate witnesses. You just write a program, and all the intermediate witnesses are automatically generated. And when the compiler is doing that well, it's fantastic. When the compiler is doing it suboptimal, it can be hard for you to optimize further. OK, so these are the pros and cons of Circom, Artworks, and ZoKrates. But one of the things I want to say is that the Circom, Artworks and ZoKrates, those are not the end all, be all. In fact, there are lots and lots of tools for using zero knowledge proofs. In terms of hardware description languages, Circom is about it. A hardware description language is a very simple thing, and Circom is a very good hardware description language. So people haven't really found a need to make another one. But when it comes to libraries and PLs, there's a whole variety. In terms of libraries, Artworks as is the Rust library that we saw, but there's also a C++ library called Gadgetlib. There's another competing Rust library called Bellman. There's a library in OCaml called Snarky. There's another library in Rust called PLONKish that doesn't produce rank 1 constraints. It produces constraints that can be used with the PLONK proof system. [98:01] In terms of programming languages, there are also a number of competitors to ZoKrates. There's Noir, Leo, and Cairo. Cairo is interesting here because it also doesn't produce R1s. Yes, it produces the kinds of constraints that you need to use a stark proof system. So it produces this thing called AIR, the arithmetic intermediate representation. In terms of the history, these different tools and languages have been developed over the course of more or less the last seven years. Here is the approximate date at which each of these tools was created. And on the right hand side, you can see that the timeline continues to go off to the right because I don't think that we've seen the end of these languages. I think that over the course of the next few years, people will come up with, still, new languages for producing zero knowledge proofs. Perhaps, even somebody in this class will have an insight. They'll see a better way to build a language for ZKPs. And maybe, their language will be on this slide one day. One thing that I want to emphasize, given that there are so many different languages, is that these languages, they're not wildly different. At the end of the day, they're all about programming zero knowledge proofs. So these languages they take in different representations, different source representations of the predicate. But ultimately, they produce a fairly small set of different kinds of constraint systems. Rank 1 constraint systems, constraint systems for PLONK, constraint systems for Starks. And that means that there are lots of common techniques that the libraries and that the compilers for the PLs share. These techniques include techniques for representing Booleans and operations over them, techniques for representing fixed width [99:40] integers, techniques for encoding variable semantics, such as mutation, techniques for encoding user-defined structures, techniques for encoding control flow, techniques for optimizing circuits, and techniques for representing interactions with arrays. So there's a lot of common ground. And in some sense, you saw this. When you were using-- when you were using the ZoKrates language, you were able to create equality as Booleans. And when you were using the Ark works synthesis library, you were also able to create Booleans using gadgets. And there are some common ideas that underlie the Booleans and ZoKrates and the Boolean gadgets and Artworks. And so, one thing that's very interesting to me, as a researcher, is whether it's possible to try to create, essentially, a library for building ZKP languages that centralizes a lot of these ideas. So that when you're building a new ZKP language, you don't have to design your own Boolean infrastructure. You can use machinery for generating very efficient constraint systems that represent Booleans that's already been built for you. Our interpretation of what that infrastructure is this library called CirC. It's a library for defining ZKP languages, and you can find it on GitHub. And whether or not CirC is ultimately interesting to you, I think it's useful to remember that all these languages have a lot of common features OK, so this is the end of the lecture. This lecture, at a high level, is about going from high level ideas to zero knowledge proofs. And we essentially saw three different ways that you can do that. All of these ways share in common the idea of producing a constraint system, that the zero knowledge proof is going to be written about. And there are essentially three ways to build that constraint system. [101:24] You can use a hardware description language, like Circom. You can use a library like Artworks, or you can use a programming language, like Noir or ZoKrates. And then, once you've got your rank 1 constraint system, you're off to the races. You can write your zero knowledge proofs.