[00:00] JUSTIN THALER: This is lecture 8 of the ZK learning MOOC. I am Justin Thaler. And this lecture will cover FRI-based polynomial commitments and the Fiat-Shamir transformation. As a reminder, most SNARKs are designed by combining two components, a cryptographic protocol called a polynomial commitment scheme, and a interactive protocol called a polynomial Interactive Oracle Proof, or a polynomial IOP. And you can kind of take any polynomial IOP and any polynomial commitment scheme, with some minor caveats, and put them together to get a interactive argument that is succinct and then apply the Fiat-Shamir transformation to render the succinct interactive argument, non-interactive, and thereby obtain a SNARK. So at this point in the course, we have seen a variety of different polynomial IOPs and a variety of different polynomial commitment schemes. And each individually has trade-offs, a unique performance profile and pros and cons. And the combinations of polynomial IOPs and polynomial commitments also inherit the corresponding pros and cons. So I thought I would give a very brief summary of the various performance profiles obtainable from the protocols that the course has already covered and the protocols that we have yet to cover. As a brief reminder, what is a polynomial IOP, and what is a polynomial commitment scheme? So I will tell you actually a special case of a polynomial IOP that suffices for most but not all SNARKs. So in this special case of a polynomial IOP, the prover's first message to the verifier specifies a polynomial h. The polynomial h you should think of as very large. So for example, if it is a univariate polynomial, its degree might be as big as the circuit that the prover is claiming to know a satisfying [02:13] assignment for. So as a result of the polynomial being so large, we don't want the verifier to have to read a complete description of that polynomial. For example, we don't want the verifier to have to read every coefficient of that polynomial. That would simply destroy succintness. The verifier would simply be too slow. So we will, in the polynomial IOP, not allow the verifier to learn h in full. Rather, the verifier will only be permitted to evaluate h at, say, a single point of the verifier's choosing. And after the verifier evaluates h at that point, the prover and verifier then execute a standard interactive proof, meaning other than that very first special message that specified the polynomial h, every other message from the prover is short and read by the verifier in full. And then at the end of the polynomial IOP, the verifier decides whether to accept or reject the prover's claim as valid. A polynomial commitment scheme is a cryptographic protocol that is essentially exactly what we would need to turn a polynomial IOP into a succinct interactive argument. So specifically, a polynomial commitment scheme allows the prover to more or less simulate the polynomial IOP without explicitly sending a description of this large polynomial h to the verifier. So instead, the polynomial commitment scheme will let the prover send a succinct cryptographic commitment to h to the verifier. Typically, this will just be a single cryptographic hash value or a single element of a cryptographic group. And the polynomial commitment scheme has to support the functionality of allowing the verifier to later choose an input x to the polynomial h and demand that the prover evaluate the committed polynomial h at x and then convince [04:20] the verifier that indeed, the evaluation that the prover returns to the verifier is equal to the committed polynomial evaluated at x. So we call that an evaluation proof for the polynomial commitment scheme. And the idea is that this just allows one to use a polynomial IOP without requiring the verifier to explicitly receive a complete description of the polynomial. Rather, the verifier will receive just essentially a single hash value or cryptographic group element that commits to the polynomial. And later, it will receive the requested evaluation of the polynomial and a proof that the requested evaluation is correct. So it effectively allows one to run a polynomial IOP succinctly, meaning without the prover ever sending this one giant message specifying the polynomial h explicitly to the verifier. OK. So as I've already reviewed, there are several different polynomial IOPs out there and several different polynomial commitments. And you can kind of take any polynomial IOP and any polynomial commitment and put them together up to some minor caveats. And it's always worth reminding you that the resulting SNARK inherits the property of being transparent or not or of being plausibly post-quantum secure or not entirely from the polynomial commitment scheme used. So if I tell you what polynomial commitment scheme the SNARK is using, you will immediately know, is the SNARK transparent versus does it require a trusted setup? Is it plausibly post-quantum secure, or is it obviously not post-quantum secure? OK. Now, a very brief overview of known polynomial IOPs. So I categorize them into three different categories. One is based on what are called interactive proofs. [06:24] The other is based on what are called multi-prover interactive proofs. Essentially, both of these categories were covered in lecture 4, the first lecture that I gave in this MOOC. And then the third category, according to my taxonomy, is what I call constant round polynomial IOPs. And the most prominent examples here are Marlin and PlonK. And so Dan covered the PlonK polynomial IOP I think in lecture 5. And very roughly speaking, the above SNARKs are listed in increasing order of prover costs but decreasing order of verification costs. So SNARKs based on interactive proofs and multi-interactive proofs broadly speaking have the fastest prover, but higher verification costs than SNARKs like Marlin and PlonK. Everything, of course, does ultimately depend as well on what polynomial commitment scheme you combine the polynomial IOP with. Marlin and PlonK both typically use KZG polynomial commitments, which keeps the verification costs really low because KZG polynomial commitments is the polynomial commitment scheme with the best known verification costs. In terms of polynomial commitment schemes that people use in practice today, I categorize them into three classes. I think this is a pretty common way of classifying known polynomial commitments. The first category is based on pairing friendly groups and a trusted setup, meaning that such polynomial commitments are neither transparent nor post-quantum secure because anything that uses a cryptographic group is not post-quantum, and anything that uses a trusted setup is by definition not transparent. The most important example in this category is KZG commitments, which were covered in both lectures 5 and 6. [08:12] And the unique property that KZG commitments have is their evaluation proofs and the commitment itself is just a constant number of elements of a pairing-friendly cryptographic group. So we call that constant size proofs. And these KZG commitments are unique in achieving that. The second category of polynomial commitments is based on the discrete logarithm problem and do not require a trusted setup. So these will be transparent, but they're not post-quantum secure, again because the discrete logarithm problem can be solved in polynomial time if we had a large enough quantum computer. Examples in this category include IPA, also known as Bulletproofs, which Yupeng covered in lecture 6, Hyrax, and Dory. Dory does use pairing-friendly groups, but it is transparent, unlike KZG polynomial commitments. You can think of Dory as roughly taking Bulletproofs, which has logarithmic-sized proofs but linear verification time, and addressing the linear verification time, reducing it to logarithmic verification time at the cost of needing to use pairing-friendly groups, whereas Bulletproofs does not, and also at a concrete cost. Even though the proof length is logarithmic, the Dory evaluation proofs are concretely substantially bigger than the Bulletproofs evaluation proofs, even though asymptotically, they're the same. And then the third category of polynomial commitments that people use today is based on hashing. So the only cryptography they use is Merkle hashing and the Fiat-Shamir transformation, both of which only use cryptographic hash functions. So this category is both transparent and plausibly post-quantum secure. The prominent examples in this category, the most prominent one is FRI. That's because it is the example in this category with the shortest evaluation proofs. That will be the subject of today's lecture. [10:14] And we saw other examples in this category last lecture, lecture 7. These include Ligero, Brakedown, and Orion. So broadly speaking here, the three categories I have listed in increasing order of verification costs. So KZG commitments have constant verification costs. Things like Bulletproofs and Dory have logarithmic verification costs. And protocols like FRI and Orion have polylogarithmic verification costs. So that is at least log squared-size proofs with a significant dependence on the security parameter as well. So it's like security parameter times log squared of the size of the polynomial being committed in this third category for FRI. OK. So another thing worth mentioning is that commitment schemes from the first two categories, that is, using cryptographic groups, are homomorphic. So this means you can take a commitment to polynomial one and a commitment to polynomial two, and without knowing what polynomial one is or what polynomial two is, you can add the commitments together to get a commitment to polynomial one plus polynomial two. So you can do addition underneath the commitments. Again, you can take two commitments and derive a commitment to the sum of the two committed objects without actually knowing either of the committed objects. So these homomorphism properties of discrete logarithm and pairing-based polynomial commitments are really important for fishing batching and amortization properties of SNARKs. So this means things like a prover is proving to know many different witnesses and doesn't want to have to pay a cost that grows linearly with the number of witnesses it's proving that it knows. And these homomorphism properties, [12:06] without going into great detail right now, allow the prover to prove that it knows 10 different witnesses with costs that are not necessarily 10 times greater than proving that it knows a single witness. And these sorts of homomorphism properties are likely to come up two lectures from now, when Dan talks about exactly these topics, so SNARK composition, batching, and amortization. So the polynomial commitments based on cryptographic hashing alone are not homomorphic. So they are not quite as nice if you're working in a setting where there's opportunities for batching and amortization. So again, you can take any polynomial IOP and any polynomial commitment scheme and, with some modest caveats, put them together to get a SNARK or at least a succinct interactive argument that you can make into a SNARK with Fiat-Shamir. So let me just briefly summarize some particular SNARKs that are especially popular right now and explain what their pros and cons are just to try to make this big zoo of SNARKs that you can get a little more concrete. OK. So I'll start with transparent SNARKs. So one very popular implementation of transparent SNARKs today is Halo2. I've written here Halo2-ZCash basically to indicate the Halo2 code base with Bulletproofs/IPA as the polynomial commitment scheme because there's a different branch of the Halo2 code base that swaps out IPA/Bulletproofs for KZG in order to take advantage of smaller proofs and things like that at the cost of a trusted setup. And by the, way this is essentially the PlonK polynomial IOP with the Bulletproofs polynomial commitment scheme. The benefit, especially of using Bulletproofs as the polynomial commitment, is that this obtains the shortest proofs among transparent SNARKs out there today. [14:09] The downside is, especially in a non-amortized setting, the verifier is very slow linear time in the size of the, quote, "circuit" that the prover is claiming to know is satisfying assignment for. So this is not a work-saving verifier, but it is a succinct proof. This is one reason I like to separate the notion of short proofs and fast verifiers because people do call Halo2 a SNARK. In fact, in a non-amortized setting, it is not work-saving for the verifier. So apparently, in this context, the word succinct is referring only to proof length and not to verification time. Another example is you can actually take any polynomial IOP and combine it with FRI-based polynomial commitments. And examples here include what people call STARKs, Fractal, Aurora, Virgo, Ligero++. And Ligero itself is a polynomial commitment scheme in the same category as FRI but with bigger proofs. Ligero++ kind of combines the Ligero polynomial commitment scheme with the FRI polynomial commitment scheme to kind of get the nice prover costs of Ligero but the shorter proofs of FRI. So the pros of SNARKs from this category is because they use FRI as the polynomial commitment. They obtain the shortest proofs amongst plausibly post-quantum SNARKs. Unfortunately, those proofs are still pretty big. So there are at least hundreds of kilobytes. They'd actually be into the multiple hundreds depending on what exactly you want to base security upon. I will discuss this later in today's lecture. Another thing that practitioners like today about SNARKs in this category is that there's more flexibility in what field you work over. So any of the SNARKs that use cryptographic groups inside the polynomial commitment scheme, so this means anything based on KZG, [16:18] anything based on Bulletproofs or Dory or Hyrax, these all use cryptographic groups. And cryptographic groups have to be defined over fields that are quite large, so at least about 256 bits in size if you want 128 bits of security. In fact, if you need to work over a pairing-friendly group, the resulting fields will be of size even like 381 bits. That is, the field has size 2 to the 381. So for example, one of the most popular pairing-friendly curves is called BLS12-381. And that 381 means that the field over which it's defined is of size about 2 to the 381. So if you use a polynomial commitment scheme such as FRI that does not use any cryptographic groups, which is exactly why it's plausibly post-quantum secure, you can work over potentially smaller fields. And moreover, those fields can be a little more structured. And together, both the field size and the nice structure in the field can lead to faster field arithmetic and therefore, potentially speed-ups for both the prover and the verifier. I think it's worth pointing out two caveats regarding this field size flexibility that the Hessian-based SNARKs have. One caveat is that if the field that one works over is too small, say of size about 2 to the 64 rather than of size, say, 2 to the 128 or larger, there are components of the protocol of the SNARK that will need to be repeated several times in order to achieve an adequate security level. So that can potentially offset some of the benefits of faster field arithmetic if you have to repeat some aspects of the protocol multiple times. Another caveat is that many of the most important statements that are being proved today are actually statements about elliptic curve groups. Those statements are naturally statements about very large fields. So if those are the statements that you are proving or that you are spending most of your time proving, then there is very little point to being [18:49] able to work over smaller fields because the best thing to do would be to work over the large field that your statement is naturally about. And in fact, working over a different field will only slow things down and add overhead. So for example, when transactions on the blockchain are very simple, such as token transfers, probably the most complicated aspect of proving to the blockchain that you know a bunch of transactions is proving that the transactions contain valid digital signatures, that is, that the transactions were authorized properly by the owners of the accounts affected by the transactions. The digital signature schemes used today are defined over elliptic curve groups. And for this reason, some of the rollups out there today are working over very large fields, such as 251-bit fields, while using FRI. So although FRI gives the flexibility to work over small fields, it is very natural to nonetheless not take advantage of the flexibility if you are proving statements about large fields because the statements you are proving refer to elliptic curve-based digital signature schemes. OK. A third important category of transparent SNARKs out there will combine various MIP-based or IP-based polynomial IOPs with any polynomial commitment scheme that's particularly fast for the prover. And this combination will give you the fastest prover out there today. So examples here include Spartan, Brakedown, Orion, and Orion+. Orion+ is a part of a paper called HyperPlonk. So for all of these protocols, the underlying polynomial IOP is based on the sum-check protocol we discussed in lecture 4. And each of these papers combines that polynomial IOP with a different polynomial commitment scheme meant to be fast for the prover. [21:08] And generally speaking, the downside of these SNARKs right now, today, at least, is that their proofs tend to be bigger. Although actually, Orion+ reports proof sizes under 10 kilobytes, which in fact is much smaller than FRI-based proofs. But it does so using a variant of KZG commitments. So it, in fact, is not in the transparent SNARKs category despite me listing it on this slide. So that is a brief summary of some highlights in the category of transparent SNARKs. Let me now briefly move to highlights of non-transparent SNARKs. So one of the most popular non-transparent SNARKs, especially going back a couple years, is Groth16. So this is sort of the culmination of a long line of work on SNARKs derived from linear PCPs. This is exactly the topic of next lecture, which Yupeng will be giving. And the benefits of linear PCP-based SNARKs such as Groth16 is that they have the best verification costs. So Groth16 proofs are only three group elements. And the verifier just does a handful of pairing operations is typically the verification time bottleneck. And the major con of Groth16 is that not only is there a trusted setup, but it's a circuit-specific trusted setup. So if you change the circuit about which the prover is claiming to know a satisfying assignment, then you have to run the trusted setup all over again. It also tends to be fairly slow and space-intensive for the prover. And due to its use of pairing-friendly groups or just any cryptographic groups, even if they weren't pairing-friendly, it is not post-quantum secure. Now, the other two highlights out there of non-transparent SNARKs are Marlin and PlonK, both referring to when they use the KZG polynomial commitment scheme. The big benefit of these over Groth16 is that the trusted setup is circuit-independent. [23:38] So you run the trusted setup once. And that trusted setup will work for any circuit up to a given size bound. The downside of Marlin and PlonK relative to Groth16 is that proofs are somewhat larger than Groth16. And the prover is slower than Groth16, at least for a given circuit that Groth16 also applies to. A counterpoint in terms of prover time is that Groth16 is somewhat restricted in the kinds of circuits it can use. Specifically, it's sort of very specific to either R1CS or arithmetic circuits. And all of the other SNARKs out there can actually apply to somewhat more expressive kinds of circuits. So it's possible that the slower prover of Marlin and PlonK relative to Groth16 for a given circuit can be more than offset by the ability of Marlin and PlonK to apply to a more general class of circuits. And a slower prover applied to a smaller circuit might in the end be faster than a faster prover applied to a bigger circuit. Another thing people like to say about Groth16 is that, quote, "addition gates" are free. And what they mean is that the trusted setup in Groth16, which is circuit-specific, does have runtime costs that grow with the number of addition gates in the circuit. But once the trusted setup is done, the prover in Groth16 essentially does not, quote, "pay" in runtime for any addition gates in the circuit that the prover is claiming to know a satisfying assignment for, whereas in Marlin and PlonK, addition gates would contribute to the prover time. That completes my overview of the polynomial IOPs, polynomial commitments, and combinations that are popular today. And hopefully it clarifies why we are covering so many different polynomial IOPs and polynomial commitment schemes. The design space is quite rich. [26:03] And understanding all of the possible performance profiles does require understanding many different ideas and techniques. There's just a lot of different trade-offs available out there. So the rest of today's lecture will be focused on FRI-based polynomial commitments and more details about the Fiat-Shamir transformation than have been covered in previous lectures. So let me remind you what is a univariate polynomial commitment scheme. So we're going to let q be a polynomial of degree k minus 1 over some prime field Fp. P is a prime. So that means that q has k coefficients. For example, if k is 5, then q might be 1 plus 2x plus 4x squared plus x to the fourth. So here, the coefficient of the term x cubed is 0. And in a univariate polynomial commitment scheme, we would like the prover to be able to commit to q and later reveal q of r for an input r chosen by the verifier. And the prover is going to have to prove that the returned evaluation is indeed consistent with the committed polynomial. Now, you might remember from lecture 4 that I sketched a polynomial commitment scheme that simply had the prover Merkle-commit to all evaluations of q. So that way, when the verifier requested q of r, the prover could simply reveal the associated leaf of the Merkle tree along with its authentication path. But this had two problems. This did not actually directly give an interesting polynomial commitment scheme. The first issue was that there is one leaf in this Merkle tree for every element of the field, which means if we are working over a pretty large field, the prover will just take way, way, way too much time to build this Merkle tree and determine what is the root hash. So we would really like the prover time to grow with the degree of q and not [28:29] with the size of the field, which is typically much, much, much larger than the degree of q. And secondly, this does not give the verifier any guarantee that the function that is committed, that is, the function whose evaluations are the leaves of the tree, actually has degree at most k minus 1. Merkle trees do bind the prover to the vector given by the leaves but do not provide any information about structure within that vector. So the verifier in this initial attempt at a polynomial commitment scheme from lecture 4 would have no guarantee at all that the function that the Merkle tree binds the prover to is actually of degree at most k minus 1. So let us fix the first problem regarding the prover's time being linear in the degree of the polynomial and not the size of the field. So rather than having the prover commit to all evaluations of q across all inputs in the entire field, FRI will instead have the prover only commit to evaluations of q for those points x in a carefully chosen subset omega of the field. Specifically, this set omega will have size rho inverse times k for some constant rho. So think of rho as less than or equal to one half. So rho inverse is at least 2. And this factor rho inverse in front of the degree-bound k is sometimes referred to as the FRI blowup factor. Rho itself, as opposed to rho inverse, is also called the rate of the Reed-Solomon code used in FRI. I will explain that in more detail later. Now, due to the prover Merkle committing to all evaluations of the committed polynomial q over a set omega of size rho inverse times k, there is a very strong tension between prover time and verification costs because the bigger the blowup factor rho inverse, the bigger the prover time because the prover has to spend the time to evaluate q at all points in omega. So the bigger omega is, that is, the bigger rho inverse is, [31:09] the longer it takes the prover to evaluate q at all those points and then build a Merkle tree over all those evaluations. On the other hand, as we will see, the bigger the blowup factor, the smaller the verification cost will be for FRI. When the verifier receives an evaluation proof, if the blowup factor is very big, the proof will be shorter, and the verification of the proof will be faster. Specifically, here is how the verification costs in FRI depend on the blowup factor rho inverse. So this expression will be a little bit technical, but I'll explain how to think about it in a moment. So the proof length and verifier time is this many hash evaluations. So here, lambda is what's called the security parameter, also known as the number of bits of security at which FRI is configured. So you can think of lambda as roughly the logarithm of the amount of work that a cheating prover would have to do to convince the verifier to accept a false claim in FRI. So that is, the adversary will have to run in time about 2 to the lambda in order to find a convincing proof of a false statement. And the size of the FRI evaluation proof will be roughly lambda divided by log of the blowup factor times log squared of the degree of the committed polynomial many hash values. So the way to think about what happens in FRI is that the verifier of FRI makes queries to the committed vector. And roughly speaking, each individual query requires the prover to return log squared k many hash values. Those are coming from Merkle authentication paths. But in fact, there are many Merkle authentication paths that need to be provided for each query. And hence, the number of hash values returned for each query is not log k as it would be with a single Merkle tree, [33:30] but, in fact, is the square of that. So then the question becomes, how many FRI verifier queries must be made to achieve lambda bits of security? And the answer is roughly lambda over log of the blowup factor. So that is, each FRI verifier query provides about log of the blowup factor many bits of security. So in order to achieve lambda bits of security, the number of queries required is lambda over log of the blowup factor. In summary, the prover's time grows linearly with the blowup factor, at least. But the verifier's cost in terms of both proof length and verifier time falls logarithmically with the blowup factor. So bigger blowup factor means more prover time but less verifier time and shorter proofs. Now, let me tell you what is this subset omega at which FRI requires the prover to evaluate the polynomial q to be committed. So remember, I said omega has size the blowup factor times the degree-bound k. So let me just give that size a name. Let me call it n. And let's assume n is a power of 2, which FRI will actually essentially require. So what omega consists of is the set of all n-th roots of unity in the field. So that is the set of all field elements x such that if you raise x to the n-th power, you get out 1. So this is how to think about roots of unity. I have actually depicted here roots of unity over the complex numbers. But in fact, roots of unity over a finite field behave very similarly to roots of unity for the complex numbers. So I think the roots of unity-- the picture on the slide is exactly what you should have in mind as you try to think about roots of unity used by FRI. So this first image here is the 16th roots of unity [35:44] amongst the complex numbers. So this represents the number 1 because the real component is 1, and the complex component is 0. And this represents the number minus 1. This is i. This is minus i. So this root of unity right here is what's called the primitive root of unity for amongst the 16th roots of unity. So this means if you take this primitive root of unity and you multiply it by itself, you get this root of unity. If you take this root of unity and you multiply it again by the primitive root of unity, you get the next root of unity. And every time you multiply again by this primitive root of unity, you step to the-- what would this be-- counterclockwise 1 root of unity. And after 16 multiplications, so you take the primitive root of unity and you raise it to the 16th power, you get all the way around to 1. Now, if we look at the eighth roots of unity, you see something very similar. We have essentially just taken all of the-- as we step around the circle, we've taken the odd steps. So the primitive 16th root of unity, that to the third power, that to the fifth power, that to the seventh power, we've gotten rid of them. So the primitive eighth root of unity is the primitive 16th root of unity squared. And the next eighth root of unity is the square of that and so on and so forth. And then once again, I've drawn the fourth root of unity here. And yeah, we've taken the even indexed eighth roots of unity. So this one's 1. This one's 3, 5, 7. By that, I mean just the order in which you encounter them as you step around the circle. And they're gone. The odd ones are gone, and the even ones remain. So basically, every time we take a primitive root of unity [37:49] and we square it, we get a primitive root of unity for rather than n, n becomes n over 2. And this is exactly the sort of behavior that is exploited by FRI. So let me just state some facts about the primitive n-th roots of unity over a finite field. Each of these facts except possibly the last one will exactly mirror the complex numbers picture I just showed on the previous slide. So if omega is a primitive n-th root of unity, that is, n is the smallest integer such that omega to the n equals 1, then this capital omega set of all n-th roots of unity in the finite field is just given by all powers of omega. So the zeroth power is 1. The first power is omega itself. And as you just increase that power 2, 3, 4, up to n minus 1, you step through all of the n-th roots of unity in the finite field. The next fact is that the n-th roots of unity form what's called a multiplicative subgroup of the field. This just means that if x and y are two n-th roots of unity, then so is their product. This is easy to see because the product x times y raised to the power n is the same as x to the n times y to the n. And since x and y are both n-th roots of unity, both x to the n is 1, and y to the n is 1 as well, and 1 times 1 is 1. So you take two n-th roots of unity. You multiply them together. You get out another n-th root of unity. There are two special cases of this fact that are particularly important, which follow from n being even. The first is that if x is an n-th root of unity, then x squared is an n over twoth root of unity. This holds because obviously since n is even, n over 2 is an integer. And hence, x squared to the power n over 2 is the same as x to the n, which is just 1. [39:50] The second special case, again, since n is even, is that for any n-th root of unity x, minus x is also an n-th root of unity. This holds because clearly, minus 1 is an n-th root of unity, since n is even, since minus 1 to any even power is 1. And so minus x is the same as minus 1 times x. And by the closure of the n-th roots of unity under multiplication, that means that minus x itself is a n-th root of unity. The final fact is also, if you know, I guess, a little bit of group theory, is also a consequence of the second fact, which is that the set capital omega of n-th roots of unity has size n if and only if n divides p minus 1. So a basic fact from group theory is that the size of any multiplicative subgroup of a multiplicative group divides the size of the full multiplicative group. And the multiplicative subgroup of the field fp has size exactly p minus 1. So you can only have a nontrivial set of n-th roots of unity if n divides p minus 1. And it turns out that the converse is true as well. So this is why many FRI-based SNARKs work over fields for which a very large power of 2 divides the field size minus 1. So for example, a popular field today to work over when using FRI is the so-called Goldilocks field of size 2 to the 64 minus 2 to the 32 plus 1. One reason this is so popular is that if you subtract 1 from the field size, you get out 2 to the 64 minus 2 to the 32, which is divisible by 2 to the 32. So basically, you can use, within FRI, the n-th roots of unity for n equals 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, all the way up to 2 to the 32. Note 2 to the 32 is about 4 billion. So let me just give an example of the roots of unity used by FRI over a finite field rather than over the complex numbers. [42:28] So I will choose the prime field of order 41. So in this case, the size of the multiplicative subgroup of this field, which is specifically all nonzero field elements, is 40. And 40 is divisible by 8. That is the largest power of 2 that divides 40. And so that means that there are 8 eighth roots of unity in this field. And we can kind of enumerate the eighth roots of unity by starting with the first root of unity and then moving to the two second roots of unity, which are just 1 and minus 1, because those are the only values in the field such that if you square them, you get out 1. Then if you move to the fourth roots of unity, you'll see there are four of them. It's 1, minus 1, 9, and minus 9. So you can just check. 9 to the fourth turns out to be congruent to 1 modulo 41. So it requires a little bit of algebra. But it is the case. You can check-- one of the facts I included on the previous slide was that if x is an n-th root of unity, so is minus x as long as n is even. And you see that here. So 1 is a fourth root of unity. So is minus 1. 9 is a fourth root of unity. So is minus 9. And then moving to the eighth roots of unity, there are eight of them. Again, 8 divides p minus 1. And they are 1 and minus 1, 9 and minus 9, 3 and minus 3, 14 and minus 14. So in summary, as an example here, if you were using FRI to commit to a polynomial q over this field with 41 elements, and you were using, as the commitment set, the set of eighth roots of unity, the commitment to q [44:43] would simply be to take q evaluated at each of the 8 eighth roots of unity, Merkle hash them. And the root of the Merkle tree is the commitment to q with FRI. So that has fixed the first problem with our initial attempt at a polynomial commitment scheme from lecture 4. Namely, no longer does the prover time grow with the size of the entire field. In this example 41, only does the prover time grow with the degree of the committed polynomial k minus 1 times the FRI blowup factor. I just think of it as 2, 2 or 4. Or sometimes it's 16. Sometimes people will have it even higher. But anyway, think of it as some constant times the degree. Hence, in general, the time for the prover to compute the commitment is some constant, namely the FRI blowup factor times the degree instead of proportional to the size of the entire field. So in general, the field might be vastly, vastly bigger than 41 elements. It might have size, say, close to 2 to the 64 or close to 2 to the 128 or even close to 2 to the 256. Now, there is a second problem that we encountered with our initial attempt at a polynomial commitment scheme in lecture field 4, namely, that the verifier needs to know that the Merkle-committed vector consists of all evaluations over this domain capital omega of n-th roots of unity of some polynomial of the appropriate degree. Remember, Merkle trees do not give you any promise, do not tell you anything about the structure of the committed vector. All they do is bind the prover to some vector and then enable the prover to reveal entries of the vector to which it is bound. It does not by itself tell you that that vector has any structure at all. It's just some arbitrary vector. [46:55] So the idea of FRI is taken from the literature on probabilistically checkable proofs. The idea is that the verifier should inspect just a few entries of the committed vector to try to get a sense of whether it indeed has degree at most k minus 1 or not. Now, of course, each query to the committed vector will require the prover to not only respond with that particular coordinate of the committed vector, but also a authentication path consisting of log n hash values to prove to the verifier that the coordinate returned by the prover is indeed consistent with the committed vector. Unfortunately, if you just directly use these so-called low-degree tests from the probabilistically checkable proof literature in the context of FRI, they would be impractical. The verifier would unfortunately have to inspect a concretely very large number of entries of the committed vector. And also, the field one would have to work over, at least to get provable security from the low-degree test, would be enormous. So we do not directly use the low-degree tests that were designed in the probabilistically checkable proofs literature from years ago. Instead, the FRI low-degree test will be interactive. More specifically, it will consist of what I call a folding phase, which will consist of logarithmically many rounds, meaning the verifier will send a field element in round one. And the prover will respond with another Merkle commitment. Then the verifier will send a second field element in round two, and the prover will respond with yet another Merkle commitment. Then the verifier will send another field element, and the prover will respond with another Merkle commitment, so on and so forth for log k many rounds. And then finally, the verifier will make these FRI verifier queries I referred to several slides [49:03] ago when discussing verification costs. And that query phase where the verifier makes its queries is only one round. So the interactive part of the FRI low-degree test primarily lies in the folding phase. The query phase is minimally interactive. The verifier just basically sends all of the queries it wishes to make. And the prover responds with the answers and associated Merkle authentication paths. So let's talk about what the folding phase does. So in the folding phase, the idea is to force the prover to repeatedly do the following. The prover should randomly fold the committed vector in half. So this means pair up entries of the committed vector. So pair up the first and second entry, the third and fourth, the fifth and sixth. Then the verifier will pick a random field element r and use r to randomly combine every two paired up entries. In this way, the length of the folded vector will wind up being half the length of the original vector because for every pair of entries in the original vector, we sort of randomly combine them into a single entry of the folded vector. And what FRI does is have the prover commit with a Merkle tree to the folded vector. Now, the random combining technique is specifically chosen so that if the prover is honest, the folded vector will also have half of the degree of the original vector. So not only should folding reduce the length of the vector by a factor of 2, it should also reduce the degree of the polynomial, that is, whose evaluations are given by the folded vector by a factor of 2. So if the original polynomial had degree at most k, then after we fold the original vector, log base 2 of k times the degree should fall to 0 at this point because the original vector had length k times the FRI blowup factor while this final vector has degree 1, meaning if the prover is honest, it is constant, [51:22] it's a constant function, the length of this final folded vector is at least 2. I mean, specifically, it's at least the FRI blowup factor, which is at least 2. So while this final folded vector has two or more entries because its degree should be 0 if the prover is honest, the prover can actually specify the final folded vector with a single field element. Any degree 0 polynomial is just constant. That is, it maps every element of its domain to the same output. So that output is just some field element. So rather than sending one field element for each entry of this final folded vector of which there are row inverse of these entries, the prover can send just a single field element specifying the value that that final folded function takes across its entire domain, that domain having size equal to rho inverse the FRI blowup factor. Here is a picture, or example, of the folding procedure used in FRI when the committed polynomial q is committed using the eighth roots of unity from my example before over the field of size 41. So as you can see, in the first fold, the entries of the initial committed vector containing q's evaluations at all eighth roots of unity are paired up with q of 1 paired up with q of minus 1, q of 9, paired up with q of minus 9, and so forth. And then based on the verifiers randomly chosen field element r1 in that iteration of folding, each pair of paired up entries are combined. Do not worry right now about the precise coefficients used to do the combining. That is chosen specifically so that if the prover does the folding honestly, the degree of q will reduce by a factor of 2 upon folding. And then folding is done again and again until the resulting vector should be all evaluations of a degree 0 polynomial [53:52] over the rho inverse roots of unity. Again, rho inverse is the FRI blowup factor at that point because the vector should be all evaluations of a degree 0 function. In fact, the prover, if honest, can just specify that vector with a single field element. So here, I have depicted two folds. Now, the final phase of FRI, as mentioned before, is the query phase. It's when the folds have all been done. The intuition of the query phase is that p may have lied at some step of the folding phase by not performing the fold correctly. So that is, the prover is supposed to pair up entries of the current vector at each iteration of the folding procedure and combine the paired up entries in a very specific way. And the prover may not have done that. It may not follow the prescribed folding procedure with the goal of artificially reducing the degree of the claim folded vector because by the end of the folding procedure, it has to wind up with a constant function that is a degree 0 polynomial. So if the original committed vector did not have degree k minus 1 as claimed, but rather had much larger degree, say a degree as large as n, which is bigger than k by a factor of the FRI blowup factor, the only way the prover is going to ultimately wind up with a degree 0 function after log k many folds conceptually or intuitively is if the prover lies in some folding procedure and does not actually do the fold properly. So the point of the query phase is for the verifier to try to detect any situation whereby the prover did not perform a fold correctly. So the verifier in the query phase will look for inconsistencies between two vectors, one of which is supposed to be the folding of the other. [56:14] So what this means is roughly the verifier will pick this many entries of each of the committed vectors that are supposed to be foldings of the preceding vector. This number is exactly the number that we discussed before, whereby each query is providing, about log of the blowup factor, many bits of security. So we're going to need to pick about lambda over log of the blowup factor many entries of each folded vector to get lambda bits of security. And we need to confirm that for each selected entry of each vector, indeed, that entry is the appropriate linear combination of the relevant two entries of the previous vector. So this leads to a proof size displayed here. What is happening is each of the folded vectors of which there were log k of them is queried at this many points, so the desired number of bits of security lambda divided by log of the FRI blowup factor. And then for each query, there is a Merkle authentication path that must be provided along with the answer to the query. The length of that authentication path is log of the length of the committed vector that is being queried. So the total number of hash values sent is equal to the total number of queries to each of the log k vectors with each authentication path being about log k hash values. And that gives you roughly this total quantity of hash values sent as the FRI sort of query phase. So let's go into just a little more detail about how the folding phase actually works. So the idea is that FRI is going to split the committed polynomial q into even and odd parts, where basically, the even part will just take into account coefficients of even degree. And the odd part will take into account coefficients of odd degree. So for example, if q of X were just 1 [58:40] plus 2X plus 3X squared plus 4X cubed, then I'm saying the even component of q would be 1 plus 3X. So this is taking the coefficients of even degree and sort of dividing the powers by 2. And then the odd component would be 2 plus 4X. This is taking the coefficients of odd degree and again dividing the powers by 2 and taking the floor. That ensures that we can write the original polynomial q as the even component of q evaluated at X squared plus X times the odd component of q evaluated at X squared. So we've literally just defined qe and qo so that this equality holds. So we think of qe as capturing one half of q and qo as capturing the other half of q. And we'd like to randomly fold these two halves together. So what the verifier does is it picks a random field element r and sends it to p. And they describe the folding of q to be exactly what I just said, so qe plus r times qo. So I have described the folding procedure in this way to make clear that the degree of q fold is one half the degree of q itself. This should be clear because we have split the original polynomial q up into halves, qe and qo, each of degree at most half the degree of q itself, and taken a random linear combination of qe and qo with the randomness in the random linear combination given by this random field element r chosen by the verifier. And of course, any linear combination of two polynomials, both of degree at most n over 2, is itself of degree at most n over 2. So this way of defining q fold makes very clear that the degree of the folded polynomial is at most half of the degree of the original polynomial that is being folded. But it is not necessarily obvious that the folding procedure as I've [61:03] defined it here is equivalent to the folding procedure I depicted several slides ago, whereby I said we paired up each n-th root of unity with its negative and took a certain carefully defined linear combination of q's evaluations at those two n-th roots of unity. So I now need to explain that the folding procedure I just defined in terms of qe and qo is in fact equivalent to the folding procedure I depicted here in this picture. So let us see that equivalence now. So yeah, I just define the folding procedure in terms of qe and qo. It was qe plus r times qo is supposed to be the folded polynomial. And I now want to explain the equivalence with the picture from before, which amounts to showing the following. So if we let z be x squared, the picture I had from before showed that q fold of z was this very specific linear combination of q's evaluations at x and minus x. So I'm just going to now explain that under the qe plus rqo definition of q fold, you get exactly this behavior, whereby q fold's evaluation at n square of one of the n-th roots of unity is this very specific combination of q's evaluations at the two square roots of z, namely x and minus x. So let's see why this equality holds, that is, why this qe, qo definition of q fold implies this other definition of q fold at each n over twoth root of unity z. So we define qe and qo specifically so that evaluating q at x was equivalent to evaluating qe and qo at x squared and namely z because z is x squared, multiplying the latter by x, and summing the results. So another way of stating this equality is that in our qe, qo definition of q fold, if we set r to x, then q fold of z is just exactly equivalent to q of x. So we have now seen that under this definition of q fold, in terms of qe and qo, if r were to equal x, then q fold evaluated at z [63:56] would just be q of x. Similarly, if r were to equal minus x, then q fold evaluated at z would equal q of minus x. So in summary, what these two bullet points right here show is that we understand what q fold of z would equal if r equals x or r equals minus x. We have introduced the right-hand side here exactly so that it has the correct behavior at r equals x and r equals minus x. That is, this right-hand side is explicitly defined so that it maps r equals x to q of x and r equals minus minus x to q of minus x. You can just check that if r equals x, what we have here is x plus x over 2x, that's 1, times q of x. And then what we have here is x minus x times whatever. X minus x is 0. So x minus x times whatever is 0. The right-hand side of this equality right here has exactly the correct behavior when r equals x or r equals minus x. And it is a degree 1 function of r. And any two degree 1 functions of r that agree at two or more points must be the same function. Accordingly, we have explained that this right-hand side here is, in fact, the expression for q fold of z regardless of r's value. What's happening, just to summarize, is that we verified that this expression is true when r equals x or r equals minus x. And because this is a degree 1 function in r and it takes exactly the same values as this expression does at two different values of r, these must actually be the same expressions. Yeah, so that establishes the equivalence of this definition of q fold in terms of qe and qo with the picture I drew before, which sort of explained or described q fold's behavior at each n over twoth root of unity z as a certain linear combination of q's behavior at the two square roots of z, namely x and minus x. [66:35] So I know this was a lot to follow online, but you can take your time if you wish to. Or otherwise, you can just believe me that we have two different equivalent definitions of q fold, one as a random linear combination of qe and qo, and the other via the picture from before, whereby the folded polynomial evaluated at each of the n over twoth roots of unity is defined as a very specific linear combination of the original polynomial being folded at the two square roots of that n over twoth root of unity. So I just want to mention that FRI is heavily exploiting the fact that the squaring map is 2 to 1 when applied to the n-th roots of unity if n is even. This is why n is a power of 2 is an assumption of FRI so that n will be even throughout the entire folding procedure. You keep dividing n by 2. It's still a power of 2, so it stays even the whole time. So this 2 to 1 nature of the squaring map on the n-th root of unity is what ensures that the relevant domain after each fold halves in size. If instead we replace the n-th roots of unity with some other set, such as all of the field elements between 0 and n minus 1, you would not have this property that squaring each of the field elements in the set would result in a set of half the size. So if you look at 0 squared, 1 squared, 2 squared, 3 squared, up to n minus 1 squared, you would get out n different values, at least as long as the characteristic of the field was bigger than n minus 1 squared. That is not the case with the n-th roots of unity. As you look at 1 squared, omega squared, omega squared squared, omega cubed squared, so you square each of the n-th roots of unity, you don't actually get out n different values. You get out n over 2 values, each appearing twice. So that is a very important property of the n-th roots unity that FRI is exploiting. [68:56] That property is not satisfied by other natural interpolation domains, such as the first n field elements. So that is a complete description of FRI. Before I sketch why it is sound and talk about polynomial commitment schemes derived from FRI, let me compare it to the polynomial commitment schemes, such as Ligero, Brakedown, and Orion that we saw last lecture from Yupeng. So in Yupeng's lecture, when he covered the error-correcting code-based polynomial commitment schemes, those commitment schemes were very similar to FRI in that they all used error-correcting codes. So FRI uses something called the Reed-Solomon code, which involves taking a vector, interpreting it as a univariate polynomial, and evaluating that polynomial at many points in the finite field, in this case, the n-th roots of unity. And that's why I said before that this parameter, rho and FRI, is also called the rate of the Reed-Solomon code. That's where that terminology comes from is the coding theory literature on Reed-Solomon codes. So the polynomial commitment schemes in Yupeng's lecture were very similar in that they also used error-correcting codes, not necessarily just the Reed-Solomon code. And the only cryptography they use was hashing. Now, the differences between the lecture 7 polynomial commitments and FRI were as follows. So the lecture 7 schemes viewed any degree d polynomial as consisting of d to the one half vectors, each of length d to the one half. And so they thought of the polynomial as sort of like a root d by d matrix. And they performed what I call a single random fold of all these vectors. That is, the verifier demanded that the prover send a random linear combination of the rhos of this matrix. So that's one giant fold where you combine root d vectors, each with length root d, into a single vector of length root d [71:07] by taking a random linear combination of each of the vectors. This winds up resulting in a polynomial commitment scheme with larger proofs than FRI, namely size about root d, but has some advantages over FRI. For example, you can achieve a linear time prover, which FRI does not, because evaluating the committed polynomial q at all n-th roots of unity requires super linear time. Whereas if you use a different error-correcting code than the Reed-Solomon code, you can hope for truly linear time. Also, Brakedown is unique today in that it works over any sufficiently large field. Unlike FRI, unlike Ligero, unlike Orion, it does not have to work over a field where a very large power of 2 divides the field size minus 1. In comparison to the lecture 7 commitment schemes, which kind of did one giant fold of many vectors, FRI views the polynomial to be committed as a single vector of length order d, order its degree. The hidden constant in this order, big O notation, is the FRI blowup factor rho inverse. And what FRI does is it randomly folds that vector in half logarithmically many times. So rather than doing a single giant fold, it does one fold in half to have the size of the committed vector and the degree of the resulting polynomial. And then it folds that in half, and it folds that in half, and it folds that in half until it's reduced the degree of the prover's being honest to zero. So that's how I think you should compare the two conceptually. Everything from last lecture did a single giant fold. FRI does logarithmically many folds in half. Now, let me sketch the security analysis of FRI. So recall that at the start of the FRI polynomial commitment scheme, the prover sends a Merkle commitment to a vector w, which, if the prover is honest, is equal to q's evaluations over all n-th roots of unity, where n is noticeably bigger than the degree of q, [73:19] namely k minus 1. So the verifier needs to check that indeed, this committed vector w has degree at most k minus 1. And that is sort of conceptually difficult to do. That's kind of the magic of FRI without just reading all of w, which would destroy succinctness of the evaluation proofs if the verifier needed to read the entirety of the committed vector. So yeah, in order to explain how the security analysis works, let delta denote the relative Hamming distance of the committed polynomial q from the closest polynomial h that does have degree at most k minus 1. So think of h as the closest honest polynomial to the actual committed polynomial q. So if the prover is lying, the actual committed polynomial q might have degree up to n. But the closest honest polynomial is h. And by honest, I mean the closest polynomial that actually does have degree k minus 1, which the prover is claiming q does but is lying possibly. So by relative Hamming distance, what I mean is delta is the fraction of n-th roots of unity such that h and q do not agree at that input. So that's called relative Hamming distance. That's the fraction of inputs over which q's evaluations were provided at which q disagrees from the closest honest polynomial h. So the key claim is that the prover will pass all of the FRI verifier queries with this probability. So this is degree of the honest polynomial k minus 1 divided by the field size plus 1 minus delta to the number of queries. Now, each of these terms in this probability has a natural interpretation. So this degree over field size is capturing the probability that the prover gets lucky in the folding phase. And one of the folded vectors has degree much less than the vector that is being folded divided by 2. [75:52] So I said each fold should reduce the degree of the committed function by a factor of 2. If the prover gets really, really lucky, the degree might actually fall by a factor more than 2. And if that happens, the prover might be able to reduce the degree all the way to zero after log k folds, even though he started with something of degree n rather than degree k. So this degree over field size probability is bounding the probability that one of the folds is lucky for the prover. And when the verifier picks a random field element to do the fold with, it's saying that there's, at most, k many field elements that the verifier might pick that reduce the degree of the committed function by a factor more than 2, which would help a cheating prover. And then you think of the second term as 1 minus delta to the number of FRI verifier queries as the probability that the prover passes all of the verifier's consistency checks in the query phase despite the fact that it did not get a lucky fold, that the cheating prover did not get a lucky fold. So this is like the probability that even though the-- it must have done at least one of the folds incorrectly. The verifier fails to detect the inconsistency during the query phase. So some caveats about this claim before I explain why you should expect a claim to be true. The first caveat is that this claim is only known to hold for proximity parameters delta up to 1 minus the square root of rho. Though it is conjectured to hold for delta all the way up to 1 minus rho. What this means is that we can only prove that each FRI verifier query provides one half log 1 over rho bits of security. Whereas it is conjectured that each FRI verifier query provides log 1 over rho bits of security. Most and really I think all deployments of FRI analyze security under the conjecture. [78:26] So that is, they simply assume that each FRI verifier query provides log 1 over rho bits of security. When in fact, what we can prove is one half of that. So one would need to double the number of FRI verifier queries, thereby doubling the size of the proof and doubling the verifier runtime in order to establish the desired security level that these projects do desire under an unconditional result. So just as an example, if the FRI blowup factor is 4, then each FRI verifier query is conjectured to contribute two bits of security but is only proven to provide one bit of security. With the aforementioned caveats out of the way, let me sketch how this claim is proven. Recall that the folded polynomial is defined as a random linear combination of q even and q odd. And it is really straightforward check that if q is delta far from every degree k minus 1 polynomial, then at least one of qe or qo must be at least delta far from every degree k over 2 polynomial over the n over twoth roots of unity. So that is, if both qe and qo were delta close to low-degree polynomials over the n over twoth roots of unity, it is not hard to check that q itself would also be close to a degree k polynomial over the n-th roots of unity. So the fact that the prover is lying, meaning that q is delta far from every degree k minus 1 polynomial h, tells us that at least one of qe or qo is also delta far but now with the relative Hamming distance defined over the n over twoth roots of unity. So the key idea is that a random linear combination of two functions q even and q odd, at least one of which is delta far from degree d polynomials, will also be delta far from degree d with overwhelming probability, where the probability here is of the random choice of the linear combination. [81:03] Remember, the folded polynomial was defined as qe plus r times qo. So the probability that this idea refers to is just over the random choice of r. So quantitatively, this k over p term, where p is the field size, bounds this probability that the cheating prover gets a lucky r, whereby q fold winds up being closer to a polynomial of degree less than k over 2 than it should be, given that q is not close to any polynomial of degree at most k. So that is the first idea, which basically says that the prover is very unlucky to, quote, "get a lucky fold." The second idea is that if the prover does not get a lucky fold, then the true final folded function will basically, by definition, be at least delta far from any degree zero function. But FRI forces the prover to send a degree zero function in the final round of the folding procedure. So at least one fold had to have been done dishonestly by the cheating prover. And in this case, each FRI verifier query will detect some inconsistency within a fold, meaning it will detect that the folded vector is not the appropriate linear combination of the paired up entries of the vector that was folded, with the probability it will detect this is at least this proximity of parameter delta. So the probability that every single one of the FRI verifier queries fails to detect any inconsistency is at most 1 minus delta to the number of queries. It's saying that any particular query fails to detect the inconsistency with probability 1 minus delta. So the probability that all of the queries fail to detect the inconsistency is at most 1 minus delta raised to the power number of queries. So that is the idea behind the soundness analysis of FRI. Now, I do want to mention the known attack on FRI, which shows that the conjectured soundness of FRI, if true, [83:28] is tight. So here is the known attack. So recall at the start of the FRI polynomial commitment scheme, the prover Merkle-commits to a vector, which is claimed to equal the polynomial to be committed's evaluations over the n-th roots of unity. Here, n is larger than the claimed degree-bound k by a factor equal to the FRI blowup factor rho inverse. So the following prover strategy works for any polynomial q, even one that is maximally far from degree k. And this prover strategy will pass all of the FRI verifier checks with probability at least rho to the number of FRI verifier queries t. So this is saying this prover strategy works no matter how big a lie the prover is telling. So no matter how far the committed function q is from a degree k polynomial, the following prover strategy will succeed in convincing the verifier to accept the false claim that q has degree k with probability at least rho to the t. So here is the strategy. The prover picks a set capital T of k elements of the n-th roots of unity and interpolates a polynomial, let me call it s, of degree k minus 1. That agrees with q just at those points in capital T. So s is going to agree with q at exactly k points, k n-th roots of unity. And we're not going to control s's behavior at any other points whatsoever. Now, during the folding phase, in the very first round of the folding phase when the prover is supposed to fold q, it instead folds s. At all other folds, it answers honestly. So the very first fold is done dishonestly, meaning it is done with evaluations of s at the n-th roots of unity rather than with q at the n-th roots of unity. And then from then on, the prover throughout the entire protocol behaves honestly. [85:55] And the point is that this proving strategy will pass all of the verifier's checks if every one of its T-- of the verifier's T queries lies in the said capital T at which and s q agree. And because we are looking at the n-th roots of unity, and s and q agree at a rho fraction of those n-th roots of unity, each individual FRI verifier query lies in the agreement set with probability rho. All little t FRI verifier queries lie in the agreement set with probability at least rho to the t. So to summarize, if the conjectured soundness of FRI is correct, the conjecture would be tight. There would be no hope of improving it because there is a very simple attack that achieves success probability rho to the number of FRI verifier queries, regardless of how big a lie the prover is telling, by which I mean this attack works for any committed function q, no matter how far it is from a degree k polynomial. Of course, the prover is claiming it has degree k and saying that this attack will work no matter how untrue that claim might be. Now, let's finally talk about getting a polynomial commitment scheme from FRI because believe it or not, even after all of this time I spent explaining FRI, we've not actually seen a complete polynomial commitment scheme from it. So remember, going back to our initial attempt at a polynomial commitment scheme from lecture 4, the prover Merkle committed to all evaluations of the polynomial q to be committed, meaning every evaluation from the entire field. And this meant that when the verifier in this attempted polynomial commitment scheme requested the evaluation of q at some point r in the field, the prover could just reveal the associated Merkle leaf along with the authentication information. But now we have the problem that FRI only has the prover Merkle-commit to evaluations of q [88:19] amongst the n-th roots of unity, not over the whole field. So that is an issue because the verifier may request an evaluation of q at any point r in the field, not just among the n-th roots of unity. So it's not going to be enough for the prover to simply reveal some leaf of the Merkle tree along with authentication information, since if r is not an n-th root of unity, the q evaluated at r is not a leaf of the Merkle tree. That is just one problem. Another problem is that the verifier does not know, after applying FRI to q, that q is exactly low-degree. All it winds up being convinced of is that q is, quote, "not too far" from low-degree, meaning that the verifier, after applying the FRI low-degree test, is convinced that the relative Hamming distance of q from a degree k minus 1 polynomial is not too big. But it does not know that relative Hamming distance is zero. So we have to address both issues. So the way to address this relies on the following fact, which was also used in KZG commitments. So it is that a degree d univariate polynomial q satisfies the property that it evaluates to v at input r if and only if there exists a polynomial w of degree at most d such that q of x minus v is equal to w times X minus r. So it is easy to see that if q of r equals v, then q of x minus v will be divisible by x minus r because both the left-hand side and the right-hand side will evaluate to zero at r. And so w would just be the quotient polynomial in that case. And it is also easy to see that if q of r does not equal v, then we cannot possibly have such a w because the left-hand side at r would evaluate to something non-zero, while the right-hand side would evaluate to zero, which would be a contradiction. Hence, in order to confirm that q of r equals v where q is the committed polynomial, the verifier can apply FRI's fold and query procedure [91:05] to the function obtained by taking the equation above and multiplying both the left-hand side and right-hand side by x minus r inverse using degree-bound d minus 1. So that effectively checks that this polynomial w in the equation up here indeed exists and has degree at most d minus 1, which the fact that we discussed above explains is equivalent to the committed polynomial q evaluating to v at input r. So note that in order to apply FRI to this function here, the FRI verifier way will have to query this function at various n-th roots of unity when the FRI query procedure is applied. And any evaluation of this function can be obtained with just a single query to q at the same point. The verifier then derives this function evaluated at that point by simply subtracting v from it and then multiplying the result by the evaluation point minus r inverse. And it is not difficult to show that in order for the prover to pass the verifier's checks in this polynomial commitment scheme with noticeable probability, it better be the case that the claimed evaluation of the committed polynomial q at r is equal to h evaluated at r, where h is the degree d polynomial that is closest to q. So this polynomial commitment scheme kind of has the cool property that even though the verifier doesn't know for sure that the committed vector q is exactly low-degree, is exactly degree at most d, where, in my earlier notation, d was k minus 1, nonetheless, for the prover to pass the verifier's checks with noticeable probability in this commitment scheme, whereby the FRI low-degree test is applied to this derived polynomial derived from the requested evaluation point and the claimed evaluation, then the prover has to have the claimed evaluation equal to an actual exactly low-degree polynomial h evaluated at the requested point r. So effectively, the prover is bound [94:04] to answer evaluations to q consistently with the closest truly low-degree polynomial h to q. So a caveat here is that the security analysis of this polynomial commitment scheme requires the relative Hamming distance with which the FRI low-degree test is applied and analyzed to be at least this quantity 1 minus rho over 2. This is called the unique decoding radius of the Reed-Solomon code. The upshot is that each FRI verifier query will bring less than 1 bit of security to this polynomial commitment scheme. So what's happening is that today, people are using FRI actually as a weaker primitive than the polynomial commitment scheme described in this slide. They are using it as something that's more properly referred to as a list polynomial commitment scheme. It turns out that a list polynomial commitment scheme still suffices for SNARK security. So a list polynomial commitment scheme effectively does not bind p to a single low-degree polynomial as required by a polynomial commitment scheme, but instead bounds p to a small set of low-degree polynomials in the sense that when the verifier requests q of r, the prover does not necessarily have to answer consistent with h of r for a fixed low-degree polynomial h, but instead is able to choose from a small set of low-degree polynomials and answer with any one of those polynomials from the small set evaluated at r. And this so-called list polynomial commitment scheme turns out to be enough for SNARK security. So it is a bit of a simplification or a lie to tell you that every single SNARK out there combines a polynomial IOP with a polynomial commitment scheme. In fact, it often suffices to use a list polynomial commitment scheme. At any rate, so people are using this weaker primitive [96:31] called a list polynomial commitment scheme in order to be able to conjecture that each FRI verifier query provides log of 1 over rho bits of security rather than less than 1 bit of security and thereby keep the verification costs smaller than if they used a FRI as a true polynomial commitment scheme that binds the prover to a single polynomial of a specified degree bound. Now, let us talk in detail about the Fiat-Shamir transformation in concrete security because when FRI is deployed today in blockchain applications, it is, as far as I know, always deployed non-interactively by applying Fiat-Shamir to it. And of course, the Fiat-Shamir transformation is used in almost all SNARKs with the notable exception of Groth16. Every other SNARK in use today, as far as I am aware, there might be some small exceptions that are related to Groth16, will take an interactive succinct argument and render it non-interactive with Fiat-Shamir. So let us discuss Fiat-Shamir in more detail than any of the previous lectures. So I am going to remind you how Fiat-Shamir works. I am going to describe it for simplicity in the context of a three-message interactive protocol, where the prover speaks first. So in the interactive protocol, the prover sends a message alpha to the verifier, who responds with a random challenge beta. And then the prover responds to beta with a final message gamma. Now, in order to render this interactive protocol non-interactive, what the Fiat-Shamir transformation will do is effectively replace beta with a hash evaluation with the hash function modeled as a random oracle R. So specifically, rather than the verifier choosing beta and sending it to the prover, beta will be chosen by evaluating the random oracle, think of that as a cryptographic hash function, [98:53] at the prover's first message in the protocol alpha. Now, if you want the resulting non-interactive argument to satisfy something called adaptive security, which means it is secure even if the adversary can select the input x fed to the verifier, you better include x in the tuple being hashed in addition to the prover's first message. This is actually a mistake that has appeared many times over many years, including recently in many SNARK deployments. And so please don't make that mistake yourself. If you omit x-- that x here is the verifier's public input. If you omit it from the Fiat-Shamir hashing, you will not have adaptive security. That is, you will not have security against a prover that can choose x adversarially for the non-interactive arguments. So whenever you apply the Fiat-Shamir transformation, the following attack is always available for a cheating prover. So this is often called the grinding attack on Fiat-Shamir. So a cheating prover making a false claim can iterate over all first messages alpha until it finds one that hashes to a lucky verifier challenge beta. By a lucky verifier challenge beta, I mean one for which the cheating prover can efficiently find a response gamma that will convince the verifier to accept. So in this grinding attack, the prover just-- it tries some first message alpha. Sees if the resulting hash value is lucky. If not, it tries another alpha. If that next alpha doesn't get hashed to something lucky, it just tries another alpha and another and another. Just keeps trying until it finds a lucky alpha. So as an example, suppose you apply the Fiat-Shamir transformation to an interactive protocol with 80 bits of statistical security, by which I mean the soundness error of the interactive protocol [101:13] is at most 2 to the minus 80. This grinding attack will achieve the following trade-off between work expended and success probability of completing the attack. So with 2 to the b hash evaluations, the grinding attack will succeed with probability 2 to the minus 80 plus B. So for example, with 2 to the 70 hashes, a cheating prover can successfully find a convincing proof for any false statement with probability about 2 to the minus 10, which is about 1 over 1,000. So basically, every time the prover tries another first message alpha, it has a probability of about 2 to the minus 80 of that alpha being lucky, meaning it hashes to a lucky challenge. And it only has to get lucky once. So this particular trade-off between computational effort expended by the attacker and success probability of the attack should be contrasted with the trade-off achievable for other cryptographic primitives configured to the same, quote, "security level." So for example, with a collision-resistant hash function configured to 80 bits of security, the fastest collision-finding procedure should be a birthday attack if the hash function is well-designed. And the computational effort versus success probability trade-off here looks quite different than when attacking the Fiat-Shamir transformation. So specifically, when a birthday attack performs 2 to the k hashes when attacking a hash function configured to 80 bits of security, it will succeed in finding a collision with probability of only 2 to the 2k minus 160. So this is quadratically worse than the success probability of the grinding attack against Fiat-Shamir. So for example, with 2 to the 70 hash evaluations, the birthday attack will find a collision in a hash function configured to 80 bits of security [103:32] with a probability of only 2 to the minus 20, which is about 1 over 1 million, rather than 2 to the minus 10, which is about 1 over 1,000. And this difference in success probabilities for a given amount of computational effort can make a dramatic difference in the expected profitability of an attack when the attacker has budget limitations that prevent it from expending enough work to succeed with probability close to 1. So if an attacker is limited to, say, 2 to the 70 hash evaluations, it is certainly going to matter a lot to that attacker when determining whether or not to launch an attack, whether the attack will succeed with probability 2 to the minus 10 versus 2 to the minus 20. So the point here is that when protocol designers refer to 80 bits of security or lambda bits of security in general, they are referring to the logarithm of the number of computational steps required to succeed in an attack with probability close to 1. But that does not specify how quickly the success probability of the attack increases as the amount of computational effort invested in the attack increases. And in fact, for the grinding attack on the Fiat-Shamir transformation, the situation is considerably worse if you are a protocol designer looking to design a secure protocol than the situation for many other cryptographic primitives, including, as we've discussed here, finding collisions and collision-resistant hash functions and breaking the discrete logarithm problem, that is, finding x from g to the x for a group generator g. I think an important question that any protocol designer will encounter is, how many bits of security is enough? And in order to answer that question, one must understand how many hash evaluations are feasible today and at what price. So all I can do in this lecture is [105:50] provide just a couple of data points to give you a sense. So today, the Bitcoin network performs just about 2 to the 80 SHA-256 hashes every hour or so. And at current Bitcoin prices, those hashes typically earn less than $1 million worth of block rewards. Now, obviously, the world as a whole has invested enormous sums of money into ASICs to make computing these hashes as fast as possible. But nonetheless, this should give some sense that with enough investment in ASICs at least, 2 to the 80 hash evaluations are, in fact, quite cheap and can be done quite quickly. As another data point, a research paper reported that in January 2020, about 2 to the 64 SHA-1 evaluations cost about $45,000 on GPUs. That would put 2 to the 70 SHA-1 evaluations at about $3 million. And today, the rental of GPUs is likely to be cheaper than it was in January 2020, when many of those GPUs were profitably being used to mine Ethereum. And today, they will not be. So that should just give a sense of why standard cryptographic practice is to set the number of bits of security to be a 128 or more. That puts the number of hash evaluations used to attack a Fiat-Shamir-based SNARK set to that security level substantially beyond the reach of current hardware and also leaves a bit of a buffer in case better attacks are found than what are known today. Finally, let me discuss where different security levels might be appropriate if a protocol is being run interactively versus if it is being Fiat-Shamired so that it can be run non-interactively. Now, a polynomial commitment scheme, such as FRI, when run interactively at lambda bits of security has the following guarantee. So assuming the cheating prover cannot find a collision in the hash function used to perform Merkle hashing, then a lying prover cannot pass the verifier's checks with [108:23] probability better than 2 to the minus lambda. Now, a key point here is that a cheating prover attempting to attack the interactive variant of FRI must actually interact with the verifier to learn the verifier challenges and thereby find out whether the attack will succeed. Put another way, the prover cannot know if its attack will succeed until it actually speaks to the verifier to learn what the verifier challenges are. As an example, if FRI is run interactively at 60 bits of security, then with probability at least 1 minus 1 over a billion or so, the verifier will reject at least one billion times before the cheating prover succeeds. It seems unlikely that a verifier would continue interacting with a prover that has been caught in a lie over 1 billion times. Moreover, the interactive protocols might simply take too long to run for any prover to execute over a billion attacks in a reasonable amount of time. So as one data point, 1 billion Ethereum blocks should require about three years to create, assuming Ethereum is creating blocks at about one block per 12 seconds. In contrast, if you apply Fiat-Shamir to an interactive protocol such as FRI that was run at lambda bits of interactive security before Fiat-Shamir was applied, the resulting non-interactive protocol is a much weaker security guarantee. Essentially, the key point is that a lying prover can attempt the grinding attack silently. So unlike in the interactive case, the prover can basically just perform something resembling the interactive attempts at attacks in its own head without revealing to the verifier that the attack is occurring. So rather than the actual verifier having to reject the prover over 1 billion times for the prover to have even a 1 in a billion chance to succeed, [110:37] the prover can just attempt the grinding attack, meaning with one hash evaluation required per attempt 2 to the 60 times, which is entirely feasible on modern hardware, without any verifier ever knowing that the prover was attempting an attack in the first place. As a result, much higher security levels are required in the non-interactive setting than in the interactive setting. So for example, 60 bits of security might be totally fine in the interactive setting unless very, very, very large sums of money on the line. Think multiple billions of dollars perhaps. Whereas in the non-interactive setting, 60 bits of security is not going to be enough unless the payoff is really minimal because again, 2 to the 64 SHA-1 hash evaluations three years ago cost under $45,000. Finally, I want to discuss an issue that while well-known, I feel may be nonetheless underappreciated today. And that is that the Fiat-Shamir transformation can lead to a tremendous loss of security when it is applied to many-round interactive protocols to render them non-interactive. In fact, when applying the Fiat-Shamir transformation to some many-round protocols that have negligible soundness error, the resulting non-interactive protocol may be entirely insecure. Here is the canonical example of such an interactive protocol. Consider the empty language. So this means that the verifier should always reject. Literally nothing should be accepted by the verifier. And let us consider the following somewhat silly interactive protocol for the empty language. So the prover in this silly interactive protocol sends a single message, which I'm going to call a nonce because the verifier is just going to ignore the prover's message. So after the verifier receives and ignores the prover's message, the verifier then tosses a coin and halts and outputs [112:49] reject if the coin comes up heads, but halts and outputs accept if the coin comes up tails. Now, the soundness error of this protocol is one half because with probability at half, the verifier winds up accepting when it really should never accept. Now, if you sequentially repeat this protocol lambda times and accept only if every repetition of the base protocol accepts, the soundness error falls from one half in one repetition to 1 over 2 to the lambda because the probability that all lambda runs accept is exactly 1 over 2 to the lambda. Now, consider applying Fiat-Shamir to this lambda round protocol obtained by sequentially repeating the soundness error half protocol lambda times. Applying Fiat-Shamir to this protocol will render the protocol non-interactive. However, the resulting protocol is totally insecure. In fact, a cheating prover can find a convincing, quote, "proof" for the non-interactive protocol with only order lambda hash evaluations. The key idea of the attacker is to execute a grinding attack on a single repetition of the base protocol at a time rather than attempting to, quote, "grind upon" all lambda repetitions all at once. So this is what I mean by that. So the attacker can grind on the first repetition of the base protocol alone first. That means iterating over nonces that the prover might send in the first repetition of the base protocol until one is found that hashes to tails. So in expectation, the attacker only has to try two different nonces before it's going to find one that hashes to tails. Once it finds one that hashes to tails, it can fix that nonce, let's call it m1, for the remainder of the attack. Once it has succeeded in finding m1, it can then execute a grinding attack on the second repetition of the protocol [114:53] by searching for a nonce m2 such that m1, m2 hashes to tails. Once it finds such an m2, it will have effectively passed the verifier's checks in the first two repetitions of the base protocol. It can fix m2 and move on to finding an m3 such that m1, m2, m3 hashes to tails. In this way, it can find a successful nonce mi for each repetition i of the base protocol iteratively. It does not-- conceptually, it does not have to guess lucky m1, m2, up to m lambda all at once. It can grind until it finds an m1 that's lucky. Then it can grind until it finds an m2 that's lucky. Then it can grind until it finds an m3 that's lucky, and so on and so forth. And in expectation, only two attempts at finding each mi are required. So the takeaway from this example is that applying the Fiat-Shamir transformation to many-round interactive protocols can lead to a huge loss of security, whereby the resulting non-interactive protocol is totally insecure. Now, it is known that if the many-round interactive protocol can be shown to satisfy a stronger notion of soundness, called round-by-round soundness, then in fact, it is safe to apply Fiat-Shamir to the many-round protocol. That is, showing that an interactive protocol satisfies round-by-round soundness rules out the kind of catastrophic security loss that applying Fiat-Shamir to this silly sequential repetition of the base protocol for the empty language demonstrated. Intuitively, what is round-by-round soundness? A protocol is round-by-round sound if an attacker in the interactive protocol, in order to convince the verifier to accept, has to somehow get lucky all at once in a single round. It can't kind of space out its luck across many rounds by getting a little bit lucky in many different rounds. So this sequential repetition of a soundness one half protocol [117:07] that I presented before is the canonical example of a protocol that is not round-by-round sound. In this sequential repetition, which is not round-by-round sound, we saw that the attacker can get a little lucky in each round and succeed. It only has to get the verifier to toss tails in each round. So in each round, it gets lucky with probability one half. And if it manages to string lambda many slightly lucky rounds together, it manages to convince the interactive verifier to accept. So that is the epitome of not being round-by-round sound. There are example protocols known that are round-by-round sounds despite having many rounds. A key example is the sum-check protocol that I covered in detail in lecture 4. This is a logarithmic round protocol, logarithmic sort of in the size of the statement being proven. And it is known to be round-by-round sound. So the prover kind of has to get very, very lucky in a single round. It can't get a little bit lucky in each and every one of the logarithmic rounds. And hence, we know that applying the Fiat-Shamir transformation to the sum-check protocol leads to a sound non-interactive protocol in the random oracle model. Something similar is known for Bulletproofs. This is a logarithmic round proof of knowledge that's commonly used as a polynomial commitment scheme, which Yupeng discussed I think two lectures ago. So one thing I do want to mention is that FRI is a logarithmic round interactive protocol that, as far as I know, is currently deployed exclusively non-interactively by applying the Fiat-Shamir transformation to it. And it has not been shown to be round-by-round sound. At least this has not been published. So this is kind of a gap in the known security analyses, which I'm actually hoping to patch soon with a new preprint. So it's not that I think FRI is not round-by-round sound. [119:01] But I do think that for a pervasively deployed protocol such as FRI, which is deployed non-interactively, we should know for sure that it's round-by-round sound to rule out the possible catastrophic loss in security that we know is possible when applying Fiat-Shamir to many round protocols. So as a general takeaway of this coverage of Fiat-Shamir, any protocol designers that are obtaining a SNARK by applying the Fiat-Shamir transformation to an interactive protocol with strictly more than three messages should show that the protocol is round-by-round sounds if they want to rule out a major loss of security that comes from the application of the Fiat-Shamir transformation to the many-round protocol. I do think there is an under-emphasis on such analyses today, whereby protocol designers simply assume that there is zero loss of security when applying the Fiat-Shamir transformation, even to protocols with strictly more than three messages, when that can only truly be justified if it is shown that the interactive protocol is round-by-round sounds. Otherwise, even in the random oracle model, there might be a significant loss of concrete security when Fiat-Shamir is applied. That is the end of today's lecture. Next lecture, we'll cover SNARKs from linear PCPs, such as Groth16. The following lecture will cover SNARK composition and recursion. And after that, I believe we are turning to applications of SNARKs. Thank you very much.