[00:00] YE ZHANG: Hello, everyone. My name is Ye. I'm the co-founder Scroll. I do research about zk hardware acceleration and zk proof system. Today, I'm going to talk about zkEVM design, optimization, and applications. I will try to give a comprehensive overview of the zkEVM, explain what is it, how we are building it, some challenges we met, and some other interesting applications that use zkEVM besides us. Before diving into more detail, just a quick introduction of us. So what is Scroll? In short, Scroll is a scaling solution for Ethereum. In other words, we are building a general-purpose layer-2 platform that enhance security from Ethereum, but it can be much cheaper, faster, with a higher throughput. And more specifically, we are building an EVM-equivalent zk-rollup. So firstly, we are building a zk-rollup solution. is considered to be the most secure scaling solution based on zero knowledge proof. Second, we can support EVM inside our zk-rollup. It's not only a specific smart contract programming language like Solidity, but we can achieve a deeper level of compatibility at the EVM bytecode level. And it's not only specific language, but we can support all the tooling around directly. So if you are contract developer, the development experience on Scroll will be exactly the same as Ethereum. And in this lecture, it will be divided into four parts. Firstly, I'm going to introduce some background and motivation of why we need zkEVM in the first place and why it becomes so popular in recent two years. Then I'm going to guide you through a complete journey of how to build a zkEVM from scratch including the circuit termination and the proof system. [01:56] And after that, I will go through some interesting research problems we met when we are building our zkEVM. And finally, I will introduce some other applications that can also leverage zkEVM. So let's start with the traditional diagram of layer-1 blockchain. Especially for some beginners who are not even familiar with blockchain, let me do a quick introduction of blockchain. So a blockchain network consists of many nodes, usually tens of nodes for decentralization. And they are interconnected by a P2P network. And all the nodes are maintaining the same state shown here, which is a database like a shared ledger. So you can put your balance here or some code for your program here. And then you use a data structure called Merkle tree to store all those information on your leaf. And then you get a state root, which is like-- you just do hash, and then you get a digest here to represent all your states. And every node needs to maintain the same database. And then they will also run the same software called Ethereum Virtual Machine to do some computation and update the state root. And blockchain is also called a word computer because anyone can use it to run any program in a decentralized fashion. And the program running on top of blockchain is called smart contract. So the EVM will load this data from your storage, do some computation, and revise this tree and get a new state root. And if you are a user, you can send transactions, and it will be broadcasted in this P2P network. There will be some consensus algorithm to elect a proposer in each time slot. And this proposer will pack many transactions [03:45] it received into a block and run on EVM with a transaction as input and update this state root. And then it will submit this block. And after seeing this block is submitted, everyone in the network will download this block and re-execute the transactions inside this block to reach some consensus about this state root. So the blocks are chained together like one after the other. And they know they need to do attestation, which is re-execute the transactions inside this block for all the blocks to reach the same state root so that they are maintaining the same database always. And there are many benefits of the blockchain system. It's a secure since your transaction will be executed tens of thousands of times by different nodes. And it's also decentralized because no one can censorship your transaction. If one node is rejecting your transaction, you can easily send to the other. But it's super expensive and super slow. And many efficiency come from all the nodes doing the same computation tens of thousands nodes and also need to reach some consensus. It's very common for you to pay for over $10 as a gas fee on Ethereum. Especially when congested, it's even much higher. So that's a problem we want to solve. We want to solve the scalability problem. And so that's why we use zk-rollup. zk-rollup is a scaling solution to solve the scalability problem of Ethereum. Let's take a look at the diagram of zk-rollup zk-rollup. So the idea is that instead of broadcasting all the transactions on a congested and expensive layer-1 P2P network, we have a separate layer-2 network, which can be more centralized with a much higher throughput. And this layer-2 network will post a state root in layer-1 smart contract. [05:53] And then all the users on layer 2 need to send transactions to this a bit more centralized node. And the node will process all those transactions and generate a very small and efficiently verifiable zk proof pi. And this pi is saying that all those transactions are valid. And after executing all those transactions, the state root will be updated to state root prime. And then it will update the root pi in the smart contract. So the layer 1 only need to verify this very single proof instead of executing, re-executing all the transactions and then update the state root. So the magic here relies on zero knowledge proof to compress a huge batch of transactions into a small but publicly verifiable proof. In this way, layer 1 can be scaled up massively. Imagine that if a layer-1 network, because it's so decentralized, it can process only 10 transactions per second, now, every transaction is verifying a proof, which can-- which is basically proving maybe once the transaction are valid. So the network throughput can increase for order of magnitude. And also, the security is equivalent because you-- zk proof-- the validity of zk proof only rely on math and crypto assumptions. And it's mathematically equivalent to the validity of all those transactions. Although it sounds like so magic like you can compress a large computation of chain to this proof, but it's non-trivial to build such a zk-rollup system for many reasons. One is that, as we all know, if you want to generate a proof for some computation, you firstly need to write all your program logic in the form of the circuit, arithmetic circuit. It's very complicated and hard. From previous lecture, you know that you can only use some addition, multiplication, [07:53] and similar method assertions in your circuit to express very complicated logic including for-loop, if-else, and all your program syntax. It's just very complicated. And also, one circuit is corresponding for one program. So which means for different application developer, you need to implement your own circuits. So that's really a pain point for zk-rollup in the past years because you are basically requiring a Solidity developer to write a very complicated circuit to scale up their own application. And also, even after this, you need to pass a very rigorous security, which just takes a very long development time. And worse still, even if, for example, you are like Uniswap [INAUDIBLE] swap application and there is a lending application, for example, AVI, they all build their own zk-rollup, there is still no composability so-- which means you can't use one transaction to include transactions on a Uniswap and AVI include that atomic transaction. You don't have compatibility, but that's-- compatibility is super important in decentralized finance and-- because you just can't prove for dynamic sequence of transactions-- of circuits in one proof since-- and also, you might need different unchained verifier with different zks. It's just make the system become more complicated or need some specialized system. So that's exactly the problem we want to solve. We want developer-friendly because we don't want Solidity developer to write zk circuits or even touch any mess. And also, we want composability because we want the applications deployed on layer-2 network to have atomic composability and calling each other inside one transaction. So instead of proving for application-specific logic, we are proving on the EVM level with a shared global state, [09:57] similar to layer 1. So to build a general-purpose zk-rollup, we need to generate proof for arbitrary type of EVM transactions. So that's exactly called the zkEVM. In short, zkEVM can prove a batch of EVM transactions are valid using a zk proof. And technically speaking, it's a set of circuits. And using those circuits you can prove EVM is executing correctly so that you can handle any UM transaction. So previously, when you're thinking of application specific to zk-rollup, you get different type-- different circuits per smart contract or per application. But now, different smart contract are part of the input to your zkEVM circuits, and you only proof on the virtual machine level. But it sounds like magic, but the problem is that the zkEVM is extremely hard to build with a super large overhead. So basically, instead of developer to face the problem of building a circuit by themselves, we take the hardest part to build a general-purpose virtual machine circuit. And it's super complicated. It's very complicated already to implement some functions inside zk. But even now, even not only building for program, but you are handling the virtual machine logic. You need to implement a lot of opcodes. You need to handle the workflow. You need to handle the error cases and just a lot of VM specific logic. And also, even if you really write out a sum circuit, two years ago people think they proving overhead for zkEVM will be huge. So for example, it might take you like one day to generate a zkEVM proof for n transactions. But luckily, the efficiency of zk protocol has been massively improved in the past two years. [11:55] And so that's the reason why in recent two years zkEVM becomes so popular. It's become really possible, at least four major reasons why it becomes possible. So first is according to polynomial commitment. So on the one hand, you can have a universal setup or transparent setup with different polynomial commitment schemes. But on the other hand, more importantly, it enables flexible arithmetization like lookup and some high degree custom gate. So imagine that previously you don't have polynomial commitment. You only have Groth16. So your bilinear pairing require that you have to use degree 2 constraints, which is less flexible. So that's why with polynomial commitment scheme, you can support more flexible arithmetization. And it can make your circuit become one or two order of magnitude smaller. And so that's why it becomes more efficient. On the back end side, the proving algorithm like when you are generating proof, you need to run some proving algorithm. And the proving algorithm is highly parallelizable. So there is a hardware acceleration through GPU effort, IPG effort, and ASIC effort, making prover becomes another one or two order of magnitude faster. And finally, there is a recursive proof. And it will further lower the cost of on-chain verification. So basically, you can aggregate multiple proof into one proof and make the verification becomes even smaller. So combining with all those four factors, zkEVM becomes finally possible with around like three order of magnitude efficiency improvement compared with what we have two years ago. So that's where Scroll began. And there are many different types of zkEVM out there. [13:44] Here, I will use a standard proposed by Justin Drake, which I think is the most intuitive one. And the first one is language level. So the idea is that EVM is not designed for zk. And the writing circuits for EVM will introduce a large overhead because EVM has so many zkEVM-unfriendly opcodes. And so instead of building EVM inside zk, inside a zk circuit, you build a totally new virtual machine, which is more friendly for zk. And it enables more zk-friendly hash function and all those kind of primitives. But then there is a compatibility issue because you are using a different virtual machine, which is not EVM. Wonder why you are calling yourself zkEVM, because-- so because-- For this new virtual machine, you might need new programming languages. And so developers are not really deploying what they can do on Ethereum. So to solve this, you also need to write a compiler to compile EVM language like Solidity and Yu to your virtual machine bytecode. So combining this compiler and this new zk virtual machine, you still get some level of compatibility with your EVM language. And this approach is adopted by Matter Lab and StarkWare. So that's why it's called language-level zkEVM, because basically, you are using a compiler to force compile a EVM language, not to EVM but to another virtual machine and then prove for this more zk-friendly virtual machine efficiently. And the second level is called bytecode level. And it can take your EVM bytecode and prove the bytecode is executing correctly. In this way, all the toolings around EVM can be compatible with zkEVM directly. It's not specifically using a compiler to support a special language, but can support everything that EVM can support. [15:39] It can inherit the EVM execution model. But you can still make some trade-offs. For example, you can change the data structure of your storage with some zk-friendly alternatives, but this doesn't influence on the execution layer. It only influence how you store the data. But the trade-off is that you get a longer proving time because many primitives are not zk-friendly, and you are proving at a lower level of compatibility with EVM. And last classification is called consensus level or sometimes people call that Ethereum-equivalent zkEVM. It basically need to maintain everything that Ethereum has. It's not only EVM, but also the storage and even some other informations in the block header. The trade-off is that it has a much, much longer proving time, and it might introduce some potential DDoS attack because you need to maintain the gas price to be the same and a lot of things like that. So it's still under exploration. And we are in the middle here, but we are collaborating with the privacy and scaling exploration team at Ethereum Foundation to help Ethereum to scale on the consensus level and doing more exploration there as much as we can. In this section, I'm going to show you how to build a zkEVM from scratch. I will talk about how we are choosing among different circuit arithmetization and proving algorithms. So let's start with the workflow of zero-knowledge proof. So if you want to generate proof for a program, you firstly need to express your program or computation using a number of arithmetic constraints. And this requires some arithmetization. And the most commonly used one are R1CS, which is a linear combination, and Plonkish arithmetization, which is custom gate, lookup, permutation, or AIR, which is used in stack, containing translation constraint [17:48] and some boundary constraint. So I will introduce and compare later. And on the backhand side, after you get your constraint system, you will run some proving algorithm to generate the proof. And you have already learned so many different proving protocols, but here, I only list the most commonly used one in industry. So which is a combination of polynomial IOP with polynomial commitment scheme. So here because we are proving for EVM execution, so the program is EVM itself. And for us, we are using Plonkish arithmetization to write our constraints. And we are using Plonk IOP plus KZG polynomial commitment scheme in the back end to generate the proof. I will explain why later. So let's start with the most familiar, R1CS arithmetization. And in R1CS, you basically need to lay out all your variables in a long array. And then you define your constraints over those n variables. And the format is shown here. It's a linear combination times linear combination equal to some linear combination. So here are some examples. You can just add any coefficient to those variables and linear combine. And the addition is almost 3 here, but in each constraint, the degree needs to be at most 2. And when you are proving for concrete instance, you need to fill up all those variables with concrete values and proving that I know a vector, which is input va, vb, vc, blah, blah, blah, and-- that satisfies all those constraints. And eventually, if prover can prove that, the verifier know that this computation for this circuit is carried out correctly. And differently, in Plonkish arithmetization, you layout all the variables, not in an array, [19:54] but in a two-dimension table. So this is a table. And you will fill up all those-- all the tables with your values like input, variable b here. And you fill up this table with all those values. And then you can define different type of constraints. There are three type of constraints which you can write about. The first is called custom gate. So basically you can define any shape within the table. That's called a gate. So for example, you can define this shape as your new gate. And then you can define arbitrary relationship between those values or in their cells within those gates. So for example, you can define va3 times vb3 times vc3 minus vb4 equal to 0. And you can define basically arbitrary shape. And the comparison with [INAUDIBLE] is that the degree can be higher because you can define arbitrary relationship for your gate. And it's also more customized. For example, you can compress three multiplications inside one constraints. And for example, you can define this shape and define arbitrary relationship in your custom gate. And you can define even some very irregular shape like this. And the second constraint you can define in Plonkish arithmetization is called permutation. So it defines equality among different cells. So it can be linked-- be used to link different gates, for example, like vb4 equal to vc6 to equal this cell, equal to this cell. Imagine that in previous slides if you define some custom gate here, custom gate here. And if you want to link different gates together, and then you can just use one permutation to prove that this cell-- there's a gate for this-- the gate here-- the output of this gate [21:59] here is equivalent to the input of this gate here. So that you can link different gates together. And the last constraint you can define is called lookups. So basically, what you can prove is that you can define a tuple and prove that this tuple belonging to a table. Like this tuple is va7, vb7, vc7. It belongs to this table here. So why is-- why this is super powerful? Let me show you some example here. So imagine that you want to prove for the range of vc7. It's within 0 to 15. So imagine that you want to prove this in R1CS. What you need to do is that, firstly, you need to decompose this value into four bits and firstly prove that each bit is within the range of 0 to 1 using this value times value minus 1 equal to 0. So that's already four constraints. And then you prove that linear combination of those variables equal to vc7. So it's very complicated and use many constraints. But here, what you can do is that you can brute force all the possibilities within that range, from 0 to 15. And then as far as you can prove that with vc7 is belonging to this column, then it's clear that with vc7 is in this range. So you can do range prove very efficiently. And similarly, you can look up a tuple to prove some bitwise operations are correct. So for example, va7 XOR vb7 equal to vc7, what you can do is that you can brute force all this XOR table and all the-- store all the possible entries here as some fixed column. And then you can prove that this tuple belongs to this table, instead of proving for this XOR relationship, which is-- need a lot of constraints in R1CS. And it can really reduce your circuit size. And it's extremely helpful not only for some fixed brute-force table. But also, it's extremely helpful for doing some RAM operation, which is read and write operation [24:24] in the context of the zkEVM, because imagine that if you are building for a virtual machine circuit. In a virtual machine, it usually have memory, which you write some data to this memory, write to some places, and then later, you will read from that position. So you basically need to prove that your read and write are consistent. So you can use a table which is generated on the fly as your RAM table. And you just put all the entries in this table. And later when you are using this operand, you can look up into this table. So that's why it's-- this lookup table can be extremely helpful for some RAM operation. So that's why we need this lookup so much in zkEVM. I will give more specific examples later. But as a summary, here are the constraints you can use in Plonkish arithmetization. So there is the custom gate. There is permutation, and there is lookup tables. And AIR for STARK is quite similar. You can think of the arithmetization in STARK as a-- you can only define gate to be this kind of rectangular of your adjacent two rows. And then the relationship, the constraints you are writing basically need to transform the first row to the second row. So in each-- you can imagine that in each row represents some state in a virtual machine. And then the next row is another new state. And your constraints is defining that the transition between the first row to the second row is correct, which actually Plonkish is a more generalized format because your gate can be arbitrary, not only two adjacent rows, but you can define any shape with different rotations. So I won't go into detail for STARK. Now, the question is how we can choose [26:22] the front end for our zkEVM. So here is our computation. We need to prove. And so if you look at the computation inside EVM, there are four challenges. One is that EVM word size is 256-bit. So every word, every variable using EVM is 256-bit. And this is extremely problematic for zk circuit because zk circuit usually require the field to be at least some prime field or some scalar field of a elliptic curve. And usually, we are using some curve. Even if it's some large elliptic curve, the field is usually 254-bit. And EVM word size is even larger than that. So basically, every time you need to use a variable, you need very efficient range proof almost everywhere to limit that you are not using some value that out of the range. So that's one problem. And second problem is that EVM has so many zk-unfriendly opcodes. For example, it has Keccak, SHA-256. It's just, in general, many hash functions are very zk-unfriendly. And you need a very large and complicated zk circuit to prove for those opcodes. So sometimes you need to have separate circuits for those hash functions and link different circuits together. And also, for some zk-unfriendly-- even some bitwise operations at this scale is very zk-unfriendly. So you need to handle those zk-unfriendly logic or-- and sometimes even outsource that to other circuits and connect them together. And third, as I mentioned, is that it's a virtual machine circuit where you have this problem for read and write consistency. So you need some kind of efficient mapping [28:14] to prove that what you are reading is what you previously had written. And finally, EVM has a dynamic execution trace. So for example, like for this transaction, EVM has a different execution order because this transaction needs, for example, add, add, push, this sequence, but that transaction is different. So you need to handle those dynamic like input in a dynamic way. So that's why we need some kind of efficient on/off selectors to open different constraints at different positions. You will see that later. So considering all those three factors like efficient range proof, efficient way to connect circuits, efficient read and write, we want our circuit arithmetization to enable lookup. And considering the second one where you are handling a dynamic execution trace, we want some custom gate because we can just abstract those like opcode pattern and make that become some IR for our circuit and efficiently open those IR for different-- at different positions. So combining with all those factors, we decided to use Plonkish arithmetization. OK, now we already figured out that we are using Plonkish arithmetization and figure out the reason why we are using that compared with-- comparing against R1CS. Now, let's write some concrete circuits and build a real zkEVM from scratch. So to write the concrete circuits, let's take a closer look at what the exact computation we need to prove and what's happening even behind the EVM. So we start with some initial word state. As I mentioned, you have a database. You have state root for that. And then you receive one transaction like from this address to that address. [30:10] And then the node after receiving the transaction, the node will run this transaction over EVM. And the EVM is a stack-based virtual machine. It will load the bytecode, the contract bytecode you are running and load that to memory and execute this bytecode opcode by opcode with this transaction as your input. And then when you are executing this transaction, you will result in an execution trace. Look like this. So this execution trace is composed of a sequence of opcodes that has been executed on EVM. So for example, it contains push, push, store, call value, blah, blah, and finally, return. And at the same time, because during execution, you need to write to storage. So you need to change the leaf here. And so you will end up with a different state root prime here. So here is the competition under node when this node receiving a transaction. So now, let's take a look how does zkEVM kick in during this process. So since the computation you need to prove a EVM, so you will use EVM as your computational spec for defining all your constraints. So for example, because EVM is executing all those opcodes, so you need to have constraints for all the operations happening inside the EVM including each opcode, socket for each opcode for this bytecode unrolling, for storage read and write, et cetera. So all the operations inside EVM will-- you need some-- write some constraints inside zkEVM to prove that they are valid. And so the public input for zkEVM will be your old state and your new state and all those n transactions. So your statement will become that-- the statement that after applying all those N transactions, your state root move from this one [32:21] to state root prime. So verifier doesn't need to know the concrete execution trace and the concrete-- what's happening during execution. It only need to know that this is a transaction input. After executing that, you get this. So that's what the verifier can see. Verifier only need to update to a new state root. But zkEVM already takes this-- all the execution process as witness and prove that. So your execution trace is actually your witness for zkEVM. So again, your-- the spec defines constraints, but you need some kind of witness which satisfies those constraints. So that's your execution trace with those information as public input and define those constraints. So basically, what you are proving inside the logic inside EVM-- zkEVM is that prove that I know execution trace which is uniquely assured from this transaction. So basically, I'm executing by opcode by opcode. And it's valid, which means this execution trace is valid means all the opcode-- computation for each opcode is valid, and read and write are also consistent. For example, if you have push here, it must be-- if you have some kind of pop here, it must be some value which you have already pushed already. As I explained earlier, a transaction is validate is like equivalent to the execution trace is valid and unique. But the information here in the execution trace is not enough as witness. So the first thing you need to do is unroll this execution trace into a larger execution table because-- I'm using table here because, eventually, all those values will be filled up in a Plonkish arithmetization table and define constraints to constrain [34:25] those-- the relationship between those values. And so let's take a closer look at what the-- the concrete witness you need for each step. So in each step, there are three-- mainly three types of different type of witness. One is called step context. One is called case switch. And one is called opcode specific witness. So what does step context mean? So step context means when you are executing this step with your context variable-- so for example, it contains the code hash which indicates what the code you are executing. And there is a gas left, which means after-- when you are executing this step, what's the remaining gas. And also contains some program counter, stack pointer as a context for-- VM context for executing this step. And there is a case switch. So case switch contains all the possible possibilities for opcodes and error cases for one step. So you can imagine that-- so if you have n different type of possibilities for this step, then you need to have n variables inside this area to indicate that what this step is used for. So for example, if this step is add, then you need to put this as add to be 1 and other variable to be 0 so that other people know that this is for add because every time I refer this value to be 1 and the value to be zero, then it indicates that this function-- this step is used for this opcode. And you can think of that as a efficient selector selects the constraints you need to apply to this area and indicates what this area is used for. And the last thing is opcode specific witness. So it contains all the necessary witness that is needed specifically to this step. So for example, if you are-- again, if you are proving for add, then you definitely [36:45] need some kind of operand. Like a plus b equal to c because a, b, and c are 256. So I'm using high, low here to represent the highest half and lowest half. So you need to put your operand here and some other information that is needed as actual witness. For example, you might need some kind of carry for add because it might overflow and need some other variables. So this place is for opcode specific witness. Now, let's take a look at some specific constraints. And I will take add as an example to see what are the constraints we are defining for the different steps. So for step context because-- it's basically proving that the context variables are consistent. Like when you move from step 1 to step 2, step 2 to step 3, you are executing in the same context. So you-- basically, the step context need to prove for two adjacent steps. The variables are consistent. So here is your constraints. So you need to write sADD times pc prime minus pc minus 1 equal to 0, which means if sADD is 1-- because if sADD is 0, which means this step is not for add. So only if this sADD is 1, which means this error is 1, then this pc prime need to plus 1. So which means if this step is add, then your program counter need to plus 1. And the stack pointer, similarly, if it's add, then stack pointer need to plus 1. And the gas need to plus 3. So this is the logic for step context. So basically, after executing add, with your context variable will look like. And for case switch, as I mentioned, case switch basically indicates that this area, what is this step used for. So the idea here is that each value need to be binary. It's either to be 0 or 1, means on or off. [39:02] And at most, there will be only one variable, which is 1, and other variables will all be 0. So you need to write all those constraints like this. Basically, it's sADD at times 1 plus-- 1 minus sADD equal to 0, which means sADD is binary. sMUL is also binary. All those-- you write this for all the-- all this, the values in this area. And then adding them together, you get 1, which means-- OK, so previously, you said, OK, it's all binary. And finally, you said there will be only one value and exactly one value. The value of that variable is 1. So this is how you constrain this case switch to guarantee that there will be only one variable set to be 1. And for your opcode specific witness, I'm also using add as an example here. So sADD, you need to time sADD because it only works if you are selected to be-- this area is select to be add. And so this-- if it's add, then a plus b minus c equal to 0 if there are some carry. And there are some carry. So this is add specific logic. So here is a more complete example for add, but you will notice that there is still one missing piece. So what's missing here is that-- so if you are doing add, then you are basically popping two elements from your stack, which is a and b. And then you push your c value back. So here, you didn't prove that a and b value are what you previously have pushed to the stack. So you basically need to prove that this a and b are consistent with what you push previously. So basically, it's proving for read and write are consistent. And to achieve this, we use a separate lookup table. So imagine that there is a magic table here. And assuming that this table has correctly ordered all the entries, all the values [41:13] you need to read and write in EVM circuits, and then you just have a magic table here. And we need to-- we only need to insert EVM circuit. We only need to write a lookup constraint, which you look up this value to this table. And as far as it exists in this table, then it's correct. So now, the problem moves to the table. The question becomes, how you are going to prove that this table has a correct order and-- because EVM is pretty-- EVM circuit is pretty handwavy. It's just lookup. And if it exists, then it's consistent, but how you are actually constraining this table. So what you do is that we will have a separate RAM circuit with different constraints to constrain that this table is generated correctly with the correct order. For example, this RAM circuit will check that two adjacent rows have, for example, the in-- the time step is increasing and the address will be-- has some order for this address and whether it's read or write. And if it's-- for example, if it's read after write, write after read, then it needs to prove that the value are consistent. So this RAM circuit will be used to prove that all the tables, all the entries inside this RAM table are correct. So this is-- I won't go into the detail here, but if you are interested, we have more specific explanations on our YouTube channel. You can check out. So this is-- but this is basically how you handle stack, memory, and storage. So basically, you have separate circuits to handle those circuits. And then inside EVM circuits, you are just hand-waving and look up into that table. And similarly, when you need to prove some realization for any opcode like hash function, [43:11] you just simply can't put all the witness within that tiny opcode specific area, because hash is so complicated, it needs many rows, more than just two or three rows. So what you need to do is that-- for example, you want to prove that this is input, this is your-- the hash result of your input, and then you just put your value here. And the directory assume that it's correct. And then inside EVM circuit, what you do is that you lookup this tuple, like input, comma, hash input to a table. And then as far as this pair exists in that table, then it means this input and this hash output has the relationship you want. And then the magic becomes how you kind of generate this hash lookup table. So previously when we are proving for range proof, the lookup table is quite simple because it's fixed. Even for some bitwise operation, it's fixed table. But now, because you can't brute force all the input for hash function and it has to be-- this lookup table has to be constructed in a way that is dynamic. So only proving for the pairs you want them to prove. So again, you just imagine that there exists such a magic lookup table, which store all the possible entries like input and hash input pair and just store many entries like that. And all the EVM circuits will-- when they need hash, they just look into this table. As far as it exists, then it's correct. Then again, how do you guarantee that the entries in this table are correct? So what you do is that, similarly, you have a hash circuit which you write-- you encode all the hash constraints inside the circuit. And then using this constraints, you can prove that all the entries are correct together. So you basically take all the input [45:13] and hash output, all the many instances, and then use one circuit to prove that they are correct. So you just separate that into a specific circuit. OK, now, let's take a look at the overall architecture of the zkEVM circuits. So you firstly start with some EVM circuit on the top to constrain the host state machine. It's divided into multiple steps. And you have an execution trace which is your witness. You unroll this execution trace to specific variables and fill up in the EVM circuits. And EVM circuit defining some-- your constraints, constraint in each step, or look up into some other circuits. And then every time you're met with some really hard opcodes, you just imagine that there is a magic table. So for example, there is a fixed table for bitwise operations, range check. And for example, there is a Keccak table which stores all the input and the output pair which is used in EVM. And there is a RAM table for all the read and write entries. There is a bytecode table. There is a transaction table. There is a block context table. And you just imagine that all those table exists. And every time EVM circuit met some problem, you just look up into this table and imagine that this table is correct. And then for each table, you need to use separate circuits to prove that all the entries in this table are valid. So for fixed table, because it's fixed, it's pre-processed. You don't need to constrain that. But for Keccak table, for example, you need to have a Keccak circuit proving that-- Keccak is a hash function, that all the entries in Keccak table are correct. And for RAM table, because it contains some storage, memory, and stack operations-- so for storage operation, [47:12] you need a Merkle Patricia Tree circuit to constrain that storage is correct. And in this MPT, if you are using the Merkle Patricia tree like Ethereum, then you need to look up into Keccak table because constructing a Merkle tree, you need hash. And you need to look up into that table. And RAM circuit is for stack and memory operations. And there is bytecode circuit proving for bytecode unrolling. And there is a transaction circuit, block circuit. And for your signature even, you can have a ECDSA circuit to constrain the signatures in that table. And transaction circuit can just look up this table. So basically, you can imagine that zkEVM circuit is a set of circuits. They are connected by lookup tables. OK, so just a quick recap of where we are so far. We compared the R1CS with Plonkish arithmetization and explained the reason why Plonkish is a better fit for virtual machine circuit, mainly due to the support of custom gate and lookup tables. And then we explained how to write the constraints for our zkEVM and explained the architecture for the zkEVM, which is like an EVM circuit on top and many separate circuits for different functionalities. And they are interconnected by this lookup tables. And now, after the front end, let's move to the back end and see how you're actually generating proofs and how we are choosing different proof systems. So again, here is all the circuits we need for the zkEVM. So there is the EVM circuit for state transition, RAM circuit, and a bunch of others like ECDSA circuit and all those other circuits. So in theory, you need to generate proof for each circuit and verify all the proofs to know that you are executing a transaction correctly, because you need all the functions, all the components to function as expected to know that one transaction is correct. But in practice, it's too expensive [49:24] to verify all those proofs. So instead, we have an aggregation circuit to prove that all those proofs from those subcircuits are valid. And in the end, you will only have one aggregation proof instead of many different proofs, which can massively reduce the verification overhead. So accordingly, when you are considering the proof system, we can use a two-layer architecture. So basically, the first layer, you need to generate proof for EVM for those kind of direct-- you are directly proving for EVM logic. And second layer is mainly targeting at the proofs from the first layer. But here, you can use a different proof system. So let's take a look at the requirement for different layers and figure out what's the best proof system for each because you can basically compose different proof system together, because they have different requirements and different targets. So let's take a look at the first layer. So the first layer need to handle some really large computation which is directly coming from your EVM. And so you basically-- because you are directly proving for EVM logic, you need some very good support for custom gate and lookups. You need to be really expressive because you are handling different types of computation inside EVM and more customized. So the proof system, ideally, we want them to support custom gate and lookup. And second requirement is that you want some really hardware-friendly prover to make prover faster. By saying hardware-friendly, I mean two things. One is highly parallelizable. So your prover if you are using GPU which can-- basically make your proof 10 times or 100 faster because it's so parallelized. [51:15] And also, low peak memory. So basically, for example, you can process your circuits circuit by circuit, or you can have some way to reduce the maximum usage of your memory. For example, in some cases, if you require very large FFT, then your memory requirement will become high. But if you are doing some multi-exponentiation, you can do that chunk by chunk to reduce your peak memory. So we want some hardware-friendly prover because we want some efficiency. And third requirement is that the verification circuit should be small because, eventually, the aggregation circuit is proving for the verification algorithm from your previous proof system. So the verification circuit needs to be small. And the last requirement is that, ideally, we want the proof system to have transparent setup or universal trusted setup because EVM is upgrading. And if you are using application-specific trusted setup, then you will have some trouble because, basically, every time you do some upgrade, you need to run your setup. So in the first layer, it's very important that you have-- you at least have some universal trusted setup so that you don't need to run this ceremony again and again. And here are some promising candidates. So from Polygon, there is Plonky2. There's Starkey. There's eSTARK, which basically all using also a Plonk like IOP, but use FRI as a polynomial commitment scheme. And it has some really nice properties, for example, Plonky2. And those proof systems use a smaller field called Goldilocks which can make the computation on CPU become really fast because it's not EV curve. You can use a smaller field which can fit into a smaller-- so Goldilocks is 64-bit, which can fit into a CPU register. So you can do computation much faster. And also, you can support custom gate, lookup. And it's hardware-friendly because it's fast. [53:23] And verification circuit is smaller, and it has a transparent setup. And another promising category is Halo2 or Halo2-KZG version. So Halo2 is initially developed by Zcash team. And initially, Halo2 is a-- they use the Plonkish arithmetization on the front end with the flexibility-- with various structural support for custom gate and lookups. But Halo2 initially used inner product argument with Pasta curve, which you can do forwarding. You can do-- because it's a cyclic elliptic curve, you can do recursion very efficiently. However, Pasta curve is like-- Pasta curve is not directly supported on Ethereum layer 1. And also, because you are using inner product argument-- so if you are very familiar, you know that it will have some kind of logarithmic rectification which means-- so in the first place, EVM doesn't support Pasta curve. So you can't use precompile, so verification will be very expensive. And second, because this logarithmic verification, it can make the-- even more expensive than Ethereum. So that's the reason why there is a derivative which we are using. And also, the PSE team from Ethereum Foundation, they are using. It's called Halo2-KZG version. So we basically replace the polynomial commitment part in Halo2 with KZG, because for KZG, we can have very small, small proof. And also because KZG, we are using bean curve, it's supported on Ethereum. So it can be efficiently verified on Ethereum. And there are some other new candidates which are very promising. For example, there are some linear-time prover which remove FFT to be more hardware-friendly. And there are a bunch of new IOPs around that. And also another recent trend is using-- [55:22] because Nova is famous for fast small threshold aggregation and recursion, so if you can use Nova to recursively prove for maybe a repeated Keccak or whatever, then you might be able to get some very efficient prover with those. But currently, although sumcheck-based protocol or Nova-- initially, in the paper, they only support R1CS. So if they can support Plonkish arithmetization-- which they are already recent work from geometry talking about that, how to-- how you can support degree-2 custom gate in Nova. And there are some new work supporting lookup forwarding in Nova. And also, there is new work called SuperNova, which can support-- you can forward different circuits. So those are all very interesting line of work, which can be promising in the first layer to make your prover efficient and also universal. Verification is smaller and support some arithmetization. And now, let's take a look at the second layer. So the second layer because you generate an aggregated proof, so the second layer needs to be very efficient, especially efficiently verifiable on EVM because, eventually, you need to submit this proof on Ethereum. So there are some requirements. First requirement is, as I mentioned, proof is efficiently verifiable on EVM. You have smaller proof. You have low gas cost for verifying the proof. And secondly is that you need to consider the best practice from previous one because you need to prove for verification circuit of the former layer. And you need to prove that efficiently. And also, ideally, it should be also be hardware-friendly for efficiency and ideally transparent or universal trusted setup. But transparent or universal setup is not a very hash requirement for aggregation circuit, [57:20] especially if you have some very good design. The reason is that because aggregation circuit is only proving that proofs are valid. And the proof verification logic is usually fixed. So even if you have some kind of Groth16-- even Groth16 or some more application-specific trusted setup because you are only proving for proofs, so you can change your logic here but without changing the logic here. So that's why I only write, ideally, you want this property. So some promising candidates which can make your proof become really small is like Groth16, which is still remaining a very efficient prover in the literature. And another candidate might be Plonk with very few columns. So imagine that-- when I mentioned Plonkish arithmetization, you can think of a table and that this table has many columns. And the verification cost is linear to the column number. So if you can-- and also, this table is configurable. You can configure this table to be really, really thin and really tall. And then you have very fewer columns. So you can reduce your verification cost to be very, very small. And then with either KZG polynomial commitment so that one row will have one opening proof, or Fflonk which sacrifice prover time with verification efficiency and which is actually adopted by Polygon Hermez to reduce the verification cost, or there might be Keccak FRI. So basically, you are using FRI, but you are using Keccak because EVM has a Keccak precompile. And it can be verified efficiently. But mostly, if people don't care about this trusted setup thing, they will go with KZG or Fflonk or Groth16. So as far as what we choose, our first layer is using Halo2-KZG. And our second layer is also Halo2-KZG. But the only difference here is that-- [59:32] recall previous lectures. When you-- so from interactive proof to non-interactive proof, you need some Fiat-Shamir to hash your previous transcript to a randomness, so-- because in the aggregation circuit, you need to prove the verification algorithm. And so you want the hash used in this verification algorithm is efficiently provable. So that's why we are using Poseidon hash for Fiat-Shamir in previous layer and then using Keccak in the second layer because, eventually, you need to verify this aggregation proof on layer 1 because the first layer-- because Halo2 can support custom gate and lookup. And also, it has very good prover performance because we have very fast GPU prover. And we have people talking about that. You can check out that on S-Plus. And the verification circuit is also very small because it's KZG. So you only-- pay per column, you only have very small proof. And also, it's a universal setup. And secondly, why we are choosing Halo2-KZG is that because we have custom gate and lookup support. So we can prove the non-native operations of KZG opening still very efficiently. And then again, we can reuse our GPU prover. And also, we can configure this-- because it's Halo2 and it can support Plonkish arithmetization, we can configure this table to be really, really thin, and that verification is very, very small. So it can be configured to be very small. So that's why we are using this. And this is one of the major differences which differentiate hash from Polygon Hermez. So they are basically using-- the first layer, they are using a stack. And then they use multiple layers of stack to shrink the proof size. And then finally, they use Fflonk to make [61:29] [INAUDIBLE] even smaller. But here, we are using-- directly using Halo2-KZG, Halo2-KZG, which is basically a Plonk LP plus KZG. And also, we are considering also having multiple layer of aggregation to even aggregate many aggregated proofs. So let's take a look at the concrete layout. Here, I only list some status for EVM circuits. So EVM circuit has over 100 columns, over 2,000 custom gates, and 50 lookups. And the highest custom gate degree is 9. And for around 1 million gas it needs around 2 powers 18 rows. And the more gas you want to prove, the more rows you will need. For example, if you need 2 million gas, you just double the number of rows. And then in the second layer, you need to aggregate proofs from EVM circuit, RAM circuit, all those circuits into one proof. But this aggregation circuit, the proof need to be submitted on layer 1. So it's very thin. So it only have 23 columns, 1 custom gate, and 7 lookup tables. And the highest cosmic gate degree is 5. And for aggregating many circuits, it takes 2 powers 25 rows. And just to notice here is that this is not finalized. So currently, we are actually using two layer of aggregation. So one-layer aggregation is like 23 columns, but right after this aggregation layer, we have another layer, which might only use like 3 columns or 4 or 5 columns to even reduce the verification cost further to-- And also, this row number will be massively reduced with some optimizations from axiom. And it's still working in progress, but we believe that this can be further reduced. And also, if you are increasing the gas limit, the aggregation circuit won't be-- [63:40] the aggregation circuit size won't be increased because you only increase the row number, but the proof verification won't be changed. It only influence the proving time in the first layer. And besides that, we have done crazy optimizations for our prover mainly on GPU. So we have optimized the most computational heavy part inside prover on GPU including MSM, which is like inner product over elliptic curve, and NNT which is FFT over finite field, and also, quotient kernel which is computing the quotient polynomial. So if you are interested in this, again, we have some videos talking about-- more specifically into this GPU optimization, prover optimization. You can check out some other videos. And also, that's one optimization for different computational kernel. And also, we pipelined and overlap CPU and GPU computations. When you are doing things on CPU, you can also compute something on GPU at the same time to overlap to further reduce your latency. And also, we have multi-card implementation. We have done a bunch of crazy memory optimizations to reduce from 1 gigabyte memory, which is our starting point, to around 300 gigabytes memory. And the performance is also great. For EVM circuits, eventually, the GPU prover takes around 30 seconds. And for aggregation circuit, it takes around 2 minutes. It's actually even more reduced like with our recent optimization including parallel synthesize and some other optimizations. But this can show that zkEVM is already practical. So for around 1 million gas, the first layer will take 2 minutes. The second layer takes around 3 minutes. And for example, if you increase to 10 million gas, [65:31] then the first layer will just be 20 minutes, and second layer still be 3 minutes. So it's not finalized. Again, we expect that to be within 10 minutes in the future for one block. But we just done many, many optimizations for that. In this section, I'm going to talk about some interesting research problems we met when we are building our zkEVM. Still, I will talk from the front-end circuit to the back-end prover. Now, let's take a look some of the interesting problems on the circuit side. So again, let's start with our EVM layout. So this is our EVM circuit layout. And you have step context, case switch, and opcode specific witness. And as I said, EVM word size is 256 bits. And it's problematic because for the variables inside your circuit, you need to be limit that into a smaller finite field. So you can't fit into 256-bit word into such a cell. So what do we do here is that we decompose 256-bit into 32 limbs. And each limb is 8-bit so that we can do efficient range proof for each limb. You can look up this 8-bit limb into a 2 power 8-size table so that you know that it's 8-bit size. So that you can do efficient range proof for 256-bit word and also fit this 8-bit limb into smaller cell. So this is your value. You decompose that into 8-bit limbs. But it's problematic because every time when you need this EVM word, you will need to bring and duplicate 32 variables. So what do we do here is that we encode a EVM word using something called Random Linear Combination, or RLC. So this linear-- random linear combination is basically taking all those 32 numbers and then [67:51] use a randomness to combine those numbers into one encoded value. And then every time you need to use this 256-bit word, you just use this encoded value instead and the proof for this constraint. So it's very convenient and efficient. But here are some problems. So because you are using a random number to linear combine 32 values, so those 32 values should be fixed. And then theta should be derived from those numbers or fixed values because, for example, if theta and a1 to a31 are decided at the same time, then you can adjust your limb number to change your encoded value. So it only makes sense if a0 to a31 is already fixed. And then you use a new randomness to linear combine those values. But if you take a look at the witness-- this is your encode value. This is your limb. It's all part of the witness, which means prover need to fill up both parts by themselves at the same time. So that's a problem. You basically can't do that if RLC and a2 to a31 are generated at the same time. So that's why we implement a feature called multi-phase prover, which is basically saying that you should synthesize a part of the witness, derive this randomness, and then keep synthesizing the rest of the witness so that you can derive randomness from previous values to this value. So this is-- at first when we find this, this is-- with the PSE team at Ethereum Foundation. This is extremely helpful, and it's standardized-- The implementation is called Challenge API. And you can find out in the implementation. It's extremely powerful. And it can be used in many places, [69:53] for example, as I mentioned, compress EVM word into one value. And also, it can encode dynamic length input. So imagine that if you have Keccak or you have any hash function, because you don't know what the input size for this hash function. So you can lay out all those input chunks in some columns and then encode those values into one value and then use this as your input encoding, which can efficiently represent a dynamic length of input. And the third is that you can do some lookup layout optimization. So this is extremely, extremely helpful in our zkEVM context. So I can briefly explain what is this lookup layout optimization. So as I mentioned, you can look up a tuple to a table columns. For example, imagine that we have a three-value tuple, and for example-- and this-- the values in this tuple can come from any place in this table. So imagine that you have one three-column table, and if-- so the first tuple is looking up this position, this position, this position to this table. And the next tuple is from this position, this position, and this position also into this table. So different positions will introduce different tuples, which means you will-- every time you do a lookup, you will introduce one additional lookup argument, which is very costly because almost one lookup is equivalent to one custom gate-- three custom gates plus some columns. So that's very costly. So one optimization you can do with this randomness is that you can allocate a new empty column. And then you can use this randomness to linear combine those three-value tuple into one value and put that into this-- into one cell in this column. And then if you have three values here, you also use this randomness to linear combine [72:05] those three values into here. And then you get a table-- you get a table column, which is full of your random linear combined tuples. And then you can also do the same linear combination for your table column and into one column. And then you only need to look up from this column to that column. So basically, imagine that initially you have n lookup tables, n lookup arguments because you have n tuples looking up into the same lookup table. And then after this optimization, you optimize that into n custom case, which is random linear combining tuples into a cell and then one lookup because you look up this column into your lookup table. So you can efficiently make those different positions and then layout that regularly in one table column and then look up that in your table. So this is extremely powerful. But, this randomness also has some problems because as I mentioned, you need multi-phase prover to derive this randomness. And it's especially problematic when you have many circuits. For example, there is EVM circuits. There is a Keccak circuits. There is a ECDSA circuit. If one circuit need to stop to generate a witness, and then other circuits also need to stop if they need this randomness because if-- for example, if you need to look up this value into Keccak circuit, and then you firstly after synthesizing your RVM circuit, you get your randomness. You get this encoded value. And then bad guy can just put some kind of bad values which will satisfy this requirement because this randomness-- he already knows this randomness. So he can change this limb number and get some other encoded version, which is not exactly [74:04] encoding the same number and then do something bad there. So if you have many circuits, this randomness will enforce you to half synthesize all the circuits. So you have resynthesize EVM circuit. You have resynthesize ECDSA circuit. You have resynthesize the Keccak circuit, blah, blah, blah, and then deriving the randomness at the same time and then synthesizing this circuit, synthesizing that circuit, synthesizing that circuit. So you need some kind of asynchronous but problematic way to generate your witness, which will introduce a very large overhead inside the prover. So that's the reason why, in reality, we actually put all those ECDSA circuit, Keccak circuit, EVM circuit into a super circuit so that we can just have fewer stages, fewer visits and then generate witness for the first half, second half together. So that's the reason why we are seriously considering whether we can remove this randomness. And there are some ways. For example, for EVM word size optimization, you can divide that into high-low, which is like just cut that into halves and only decompose when you need to do range proofs, but carry those two values all the time. We can still save some number. And for this dynamic length input, you can just divide that into fixed chunk and do that dynamic times. But for lookup layout organizations, that's still very important. We haven't figured out what's the best way to do this without RLC optimization. And another way to solve this lookup optimization is that if your circuit is layout very regularly, so because-- for example, for every tuple that need to look up into that table, you layout that into the same position at the same step. Then you can directly use one lookup to automate that without kind of recombining into a new column. [76:02] But currently, to maximum the usage of each cells, we kind of allocate very freely. So that's why we need this optimization. So this is still remaining an open problem, which is very interesting. And another interesting problem is about the circuit layout comparison. So as I mentioned earlier, the reason why we are using Plonkish arithmetization is that we can handle dynamic execution trace. So what does this mean? It means for one transaction, the execution trace can be push, push, add. But maybe for the other transaction, it can be add, pop, push, blah, blah, blah. So in each step, you need to prove for different opcodes. And so this is-- this makes your whole circuit become dynamic. So recall that in R1CS, if you want to write some constraints, you basically need to fix logic here, fix logic here, and have one fixed circuit and then have some pre-processed PK and VK for your three matrix in R1CS. But now, because step 1 need to constrain for different opcodes, and you basically need to enable different constraints in different positions. And so Plonkish is much more efficient in doing this because, in R1CS, the only way you can do this is that in each step, you implement something like if-else logic. You implement if it's push, then you-- this is the constraint. If it's pop, then this is the constraint. In each step, you basically need to write out all the possibilities that can happen in this step, which is a VM logic, VM possibilities, and then repeat that for every step, which is a very gigantic overhead. But using Plonkish arithmetization, you can define some custom gate for each opcode. Like push, you can define an opcode. You can define a custom gate for add. [78:06] You can define some custom gate and only open or-- all of those constraints at different steps. So recall that, previously, there is a case switch. So basically, if you set that to be 1, then add constraint will be applied to this area. But if you set that to be-- if you said maybe multiplication to be 1, then multiplication constraints will be applied to this area, which is super convenient, which means using this way, it's very hard to standardize gates. You have to design custom gates for different opcodes. But we are kind of abusing the functionality of custom gates. So for example, we have over 2,000 custom gates, because in each opcode, you might introduce more custom gates. And in each opcode, you might introduce some custom gates. So we are thinking of whether there are some better way to lay out the whole custom gate. So one solution can be-- again, it has some relationship with the previously mentioned this regular layout. So if you can make maybe your operand to be within this area, and then you can reuse maybe some kind of range checks across different steps, or you can reuse some basic math gadget across different steps to reduce some custom gate numbers. Or another way which you can do is that you can define some basic maybe 20 micro-opcode. And then each opcode consists of several micro-opcodes. And then those micro-opcodes, you will have some constraints for those micro-opcodes. And then you can have-- the custom gate number is how many micro-opcode you will have. And then each opcode will be mapped into some micro-opcodes. And in this way, you can also reduce the custom gate number. But this will also make your cell becomes-- the usage percentage of your circuit will be-- become smaller because, previously, we allocate cell by cell. [80:17] Every cell will be used directly for some function, but if you implement-- you want to reuse, then you need to lay out in a way that can be reused, which means there will be more empty cells. So it doesn't mean layout differently and regularly will be more efficient than our current design, but there are some open problems to be explored. And another problem also in the circuit side is what I call a dynamic zkEVM problem. So imagine that in step 1, you are handling some really complicated opcodes like precompile. So what you do is that you just outsource that to another precompile circuit. And in step 2, you also outsource that to a hash circuit if you are handling hash. So there are two problems. One is that because hash, precompile, and all those subcircuits are handling different circuits. So they have different lengths of row number. And they are-- for example, hash circuit maybe needs many rows because it's very complicated. But maybe some smaller precompile needs fewer rows. And then there are some problems because, eventually, when you are proving, you need to limit what's the maximum size of your circuit. So for example, we limit the row number to be 2 powers 18. And then hash circuit might be easier to exceed this limit if you are not designed properly. And also, currently, in our design, to connect different circuits more efficiently, we pad them into the same length, which will introduce some problem because we are paying for some additional costs even if we are not using that many hash. And also, this, again, shows you will have the same row number, which means you will have some kind of maximum limit of hash you can use inside your circuit, especially if-- for example, if the maximum row number is 2 powers 18 and hash circuit takes 2 powers 16 rows, then you can only use four hashes in one [82:27] circuit which is indeed some-- indeed very problematic. So we are thinking of whether there are some way which will allow you to dynamically prove dynamic number of hashes which can exceed this number and also how to link different circuits together. So the kind of reason why we need to pair them together is that also because of the randomness, because if you have independent circuits, you need to derive randomness-- partial synthesize and derive randomness together. But if you pad them together and put that in your SIM circuit, it makes your circuit synthesize become faster and more convenient. So you have to solve the previous problem and then make this architecture become dynamic and then think of a way to link dynamic-sized circuits together. So here, I list-- I summarize all the bad influences, which is you might need a maximum of-- number of Keccaks and-- because Keccak might be-- need many rows, and you have a maximum number of rows limit which means you have limited number of Keccaks which can be proven in one circuit. And also, this can happen even not only for Keccak, but also for some opcode. If some more code-- like this step 3, for example, needs more rows than step 2, then which means you can fit in less steps 3 opcodes in your circuit than step 2, which might be some problem. And you are also-- because you pad to the same length, even if you are not doing that, you are paying for the proving cost. So can we make zkEVM become more dynamic and pay for what we really need and support a larger limit of Keccak and all those circuits? So one solution people are coming up [84:18] with is that maybe you can use recursive to recursively prove many Keccaks. And then you can link those input pair-- input output pairs to the specialized Keccak. And then in this way, you can have dynamic length of subcircuits but still connected to your main circuit. Next, I will go through some problems on the back end, which is quite interesting, especially for the audience of this class because you learn so much about the theoretical proof system construction. So again, recall that we have two layers of circuit, and we have two layers of prover, and in both layer, they proving bottleneck is the same because we are reusing the same Halo2 and KZG. And the most computational heavy part is multi-exponentiation and FFT. So multi-exponentiation, as I explained, is inner product on [INAUDIBLE] curve. And NNT is FFT over finite field. And you can use GPU to massively parallelize those two components to make the core components become really, really fast. But then the problem move to witness generation and data copy. So what does this mean? So witness generation is when you are generating the value for the whole table. So that is not highly parallelizable, and that differs per circuit or per application. So that's-- the CPU part becomes bottleneck. And for the data copy part, what I mean here is that, for example, for FFT, for example, if you are doing 2 powers 26 size FFT, so GPU can compute FFT really, really fast. It can finish computing, for example, in 20 milliseconds. But copying this data from CPU to GPU takes much longer time than 20 milliseconds. So the data copy actually becomes [86:21] even a larger bottleneck than computation itself. So we need some way which we can reduce this problem. So that's one interesting thing we noticed during our benchmark. And secondly, that we need a very large CPU memory. So initially, when we implement our first zkEVM, we need almost like 1 terabyte CPU memory. And then we-- currently, we are already optimized that to 300 gigabytes of memory on CPU and also optimize this-- GPU memory becomes like 8 gigabytes, which means you can run our prover on very cheap GPU but still require a very expensive CPU. So the recent problem is that whether you can have some hardware-friendly prover, which by saying hardware friendly, I mean both parallelizable and with a lower peak memory. And also, you shouldn't ignore the witness generation because, previously, multi-exponentiation and FFT takes 95% of your proving time. So that's why people are all focusing on these two components acceleration. But the problem is that even if you make this part becomes 10 times faster, then you basically-- in your computation, 95-- you make the 95% of your computation become 10 times faster, then you will bottleneck by-- still by that smaller 5%, which is a long-tail problem, but it can't be ignored. Especially with ASIC, you can make that even faster, but you will still be bottlenecked by this witness generation. So you shouldn't ignore this witness generation. And third is how to run on cheap machines and become more decentralized. So eventually, I think this will evolve into a problem which needs software and hardware core design, because, basically, when you are designing hardware, you also need to consider what's the best software-- maybe you can-- even the one prover is linear time. It can be theoretically be very fast, [88:28] but it's very super hardware-unfriendly. Maybe it's not as practical as maybe some more-- the theoretical complexity is higher, but it's highly parallelizable in practice. And GPU can make that 100 times faster. So it can still beat that linear-time prover construction. So we really need to take both into consideration. And finally around prover, there is some problem around recursive proof and how you can efficiently compose different proof systems. So as I mentioned earlier, there are different proof systems requirement for different layers. So the first layer need to be very expressive for handling the EVM logic. And the second layer need to be very efficient in EVM. So how to combine-- get a better combination, maybe there are some better combination than what we have so far. So there are two large directions. One is people are-- kind of prefer smaller and smaller field, for example, this Goldilocks field, which is like 64-bit and even Mersenne prime, which is-- some Mersenne prime is 32-bit, which is the fast tube computation on CPU and on hardware like IPG and ASIC. So should we move to a smaller field for faster speed and smaller memory? Or another way is we stick to this elliptic curve based construction. But there are some nice constructions recently like SuperNova, Nova, which provide you-- you can recursively prove dynamic number of circuits with a smaller recursive threshold or you can use some cyclic elliptic curve to also forward your proofs and get a very small proof in the end. And the good thing about this elliptic curve based construction is that because your core computation [90:32] is bottlenecked by this smaller exponentiation. So it can be accelerated on GPU and ASIC for around 10 or even 100 times. So it can be very fast, considering the best practice of hardware. So it's still an open problem. There are a lot more options to explore, especially from previous courses. And if you're interested, reach out to us and if you want to do related research. And we welcome this effort. And another issue around zkEVM is more about security so both us and the PSE zkEVM, because we are collaborating on the same zkEVM effort, we need over 30, 000 lines of code. And it can't be bug free for quite a long time, because it's just a super complicated system with so many mathematical constraints. You definitely will miss something or do something wrong. So what's the best way to audit zkEVM circuits? So in general, this is a problem of how you can audit a VM circuit based on IR efficiently. So previously, there are some work I know, for example, from Stanford. There is essay which introduced some-- you can use some other IR and SMT solver to find bugs. But this is a VM circuit based on IR and whether you can-- and this is also Plonkish arithmetization, whether you can audit that automatically. But currently, we are still audit manually line by line to figure out some bugs. But there are still some efforts exploring, for example, formal verification or some other way to audit your zkEVM circuits. So maybe you can-- it's feasible in some time, but we don't know. Or maybe you can start with some simple ones, which you do formal verification for some simpler opcodes and then eventually extend that to your full zkEVM. But this is quite interesting and quite critical [92:32] in reality, how you kind of securely prove that zkEVM has no bug. In the last section, I'm going to quickly show you applications of zkEVM even besides zk-rollup. So again, the first application and the most motivated application is still in the space of zk-rollup where we are building a layer-2 solution. We can prove n transactions on layer 2 are valid using zkEVM. And we verify this proof. We generate proof of chain. We verify this proof on layer-1 smart contract. So that's the idea of zk-rollup. So basically taking layer-2 transactions and general proof and submit the proof. Another application is not only on layer 2 but also on layer 1. It's called-- I call that enshrine blockchain. So the idea is that if you take a look at the layer-1 diagram, why it's not so efficient, because for each block, most of the nodes need to do some attestation to kind of re-execute and then know the recent state. So they basically need to download and execute. But what if-- for each block, there are some proof proving that all the transactions of that layer-1 block are valid. And then all the nodes just need to verify that very small proof. And it's enough, instead of re-executing all the transactions. And this happens on layer 1 instead of layer 2. So you can require that the proposer who is proposing this block to generate zkEVM proof and then submit this on chain. But this is very ambitious because you are basically enshrining the whole layer 1, and each block will attach one proof. And currently, it's not feasible because for many reasons. One is that, as I mentioned, this requires the last consensus level or Ethereum-equivalent zkEVM, which is very hard to build with a very large proving overhead. [94:35] And there might be some security considerations. And also, because the proving time is super long, it's unacceptable on layer 1, because for layer 2, it's quite safe because you can submit proof later because that only influence your finality on layer 1. But layer 2 can provide some faster pre-confirmation to users ahead of time. But for layer 2-- layer 1, if you have some kind of 12-second block time, then you can't do this. So that's why it's still a very ambitious dream. And people are optimizing that including us. And the PSE team at Ethereum Foundation are working on this. But currently, it's still an ambitious goal. And even more crazily, you can do some kind of recursive proof. I take this kind of dynamic figure from [INAUDIBLE].. So basically, the idea is that this proof is not only proving that all the transactions inside this block are valid, but also prove that the previous proofs are valid. So the proof proves proof and the block. And then, eventually, you just need to get one proof to prove that the whole blockchain history is correct. So this is very ambitious to enshrine the whole blockchain into a very small proof. And one day, you just hold one proof and saying that all the transactions in the history of Ethereum is valid. So that's pretty cool. And also just to quickly distinguish that this layer-1 idea is different from layer-2 idea. And also, it's orthogonal, because imagine that layer 1 can generate proof for layer-1 block. But among layer-1 block, each transaction can be a proof verification for layer-2 block. So basically, layer 2s are enshrined into one transaction, one verification transaction to layer 1. And then layer 1 can generate proof [96:29] for the layer-1 block, which might consist of several verification proof from different layer 2s. So that's how it's different. One is enshrining layer-1 state. One is based on layer 1 and kind of doing scalability and making my verification transaction become one transaction on layer 1. So another interesting application is called proof of exploit. And so the idea here is that if you think about what is zkEVM? So zkEVM is basically proving that after applying one transaction, your state root move from this to this root prime. So if you make your transaction also become part of your private input, what you can prove is that you can prove that I know a transaction that can change your state root to state root prime. And so this-- you can-- using this very fancy nature, you can prove that I know a bug which can change your balance. So for example, if your contract implementation has some bug which after I do a transaction, I can get your balance like here, leave here becomes zero. And then I can prove that, OK, so after applying some transaction which I know I constructed, I can make your balance become from 100 [INAUDIBLE] to 0, which means I can steal your fund from this Solidity bug. And so you can use this proof to prove that I know a bug-- I found a bug. And then they can reward you with some kind of money so that you will reveal this bug, because one common problem is that if you reveal this bug to the application, they may not reward you as much as you want. And also, you can't really prove to application that-- without revealing that you know a bug. So this is very useful in term of proving that you know some transaction which makes this state transfer from this to that. And one last example is that you can do some attestation which [98:37] is sometimes called zk-Oracle. So imagine that in layer-1 blockchain in a smart contract, you need some kind of history information, and you just can't access that through layer 1. So how can you access the previous data? So one way is that you can connect to some kind of other Oracle like Chainlink. They provide some kind of node and then provide this-- they just feed this data directly to you. So you are basically trusting Chainlink or some other Oracle network to provide the price feed for you. But another stronger way is that you can actually trustlessly read historical onchain data, because historical data is like this block has this root and this date. And you can prove that-- use the state proof, which is proving for the storage, memory, and those stuff. You can use this state proof to prove that, hey, at this height, your balance is this, or the information you need is this because I can prove that the Merkle path and some other informations. And then I can take this data and do some computation I want. For example, I want to perform-- I want to compute the average price for Uniswap in the past one month. So I can use-- this zk circuit is basically computing the average price. And then you can take the price from previous block through this date proof of zkEVM because you can prove even for the EVM state tree. And then you do some computation, general proof. And then you verify this proof on chain so that you know this is your result. This is your proof. So basically, doing attestation or Oracle can be your read state from historical data. You do some computation, and then you verify that. So this can be zk circuit, zkEVM or zk virtual machine. Arbitrary computation, you can define. [100:35] And Axiom is working on this. It's basically a zk co-processor where it may not be zkEVM, but it leverages the state proof of zkEVM and also many information of the block header. And then co-processor means this don't necessarily need to be an EVM. It's just another processor and verify proof on chain. And finally, just a small advertisement for us. So a quick-- also a quick summary for what I have talked about previously. So we are building some really cool things at Scroll. Scroll is a general-purpose scaling solution for Ethereum based zk-rollup. And we are building a native zkEVM which is bytecode-level compatible, which is-- or you can call that EVM equivalent using very advanced circuit arithmetization and very advanced proof system. And we are also building fast prover through hardware acceleration. And we have a GPU in production and also proof of recursion. We are using very advanced way to aggregate proofs. And currently, we are live on the testnet with a product-level robust infrastructure. And if you are developer, feel free to try out our testnet, give more feedback, and deploy anything you want and experience that. Deploying on Scroll is exactly the same as Ethereum with the best developer experience. And also if-- there are a bunch of interesting problems to be solved. As I mentioned, there are zk engineering problem, zk research problem for practical efficiency. And also even besides zk, if you are doing some other research around protocol design and mechanism design, welcome. We are looking for protocol design and mechanical design people. So thank you for listening. And we have hiring-- check out our website at scroll.io. [102:27] And also, there is a hiring page or you can DM me on Twitter if you are interested in joining or working on the research together. OK, thank you.